Tourism and Hospitality Management, Vol. 21, No. 1, pp. 1-17, 2015
A. Bajpai, C.W. Lee: CONSUMER BEHAVIOR IN E-TOURISM SERVICES: A CASE OF TAIWAN

CONSUMER BEHAVIOR IN E-TOURISM SERVICES:
A CASE OF TAIWAN
Original scientific paper

Akansha Bajpai
Cheng-Wen Lee

Received 7 January 2015
Revised 4 April 2015
6 May 2015

Abstract
The purpose – The prompt and efficient changes in technology during the past few decades have
affected tourism industry. With new emerging technologies (internet) the method of doing
business has changed; which makes it a very important factor to understand the consumer
behavior and perception in order to recognize, captivate, and retain the customers in the internet
based travelling industry. This paper examines the determinants which influence the consumer
behavior of the potential customers to use e-tourism services and to show their interrelationship
in the perspective of Taiwan.
Design/Methodology – Empirical research is been used to determine the findings of this research.
A questionnaire was designed based on the past studies related to the variables of the study. The
questionnaire consisted of four sections each consisting of four to five statements. The
demographic section was also included. A total of 402 completed questionnaires were taken into
consideration.
Findings – The result of this study shows that determinants considered in this study; generation
of stimulus, information search and service quality have a major impact over the loyalty of the
consumer which determines the consumer behavior towards the e-tourism services for travel
planning purposes.
Originality of the research – This is the first kind of research done over consumer behavior of
youth specifically in e-tourism industry in Taiwan’s perspective and secondly as the data is
collected directly from Taiwan’s youth and is empirically evaluated so we believe its results will
help the organizations for making the e-tourism industry more consumer oriented in case of
Taiwan.
Keywords e-tourism, consumer behavior, travel planning, e-tourism services.

INTRODUCTION
Tourism industry is known to have a significant importance at International and
domestic levels in terms of economic development for almost every country. This fact
is supported by the given statistical evidences in (Anon 2014) where it is clearly stated
that international tourism was seen to have a growth of 5% in the year 2014, also the
data and statistics given in the website demonstrates the importance of tourism industry
in terms of different areas of employment, economic development etc.
Tourism industry is been also called as a hybrid industry (Werthner & Klein 1999)
because of its merger with information technology to give rise to the e-tourism
industry. The product of tourism industry is solely based on information provided
however the end product is always its physical service. Thus the importance of the role

1

Tourism and Hospitality Management, Vol. 21, No. 1, pp. 1-17, 2015
A. Bajpai, C.W. Lee: CONSUMER BEHAVIOR IN E-TOURISM SERVICES: A CASE OF TAIWAN

of information technology and internet could be widely seen in aspects of the tourism
industry.
Internet can be considered as one of the most influential technologies that impacts
customer’s behavior. This can be noticed by the facts and figures given in the website
of (Anon 2013a) which states that the numbers of internet users in the world have
increased up to 2,802,478,934 which shows a penetration of 39% in total world
population. Also considering the case of Taiwan number of users were 18,687,942
which was a total penetration of 80% of Taiwan’s total population. Thus we can say
that internet is considered as a most important tool for getting information and
purchasing of products in the current scenario.
However many studies have been undertaken before to find out the impact of the given
factors (generation of stimulus, information search and service quality evaluation) over
consumer behavior in e-tourism. For example (Goossens 2000) concludes in his
research that managers in order to promote tourism business have to make use of
factors like feelings of pleasure, excitement etc. in order to promote and generate the
stimulus inside customers to plan their travel. Similarly (Rothschild 1984) in his
research showed that interest or desire is a kind of involvement towards any
recreational activity like tourism which results from a particular generation of stimulus.
The second variable of this study (information search) on the other hand is another
important factor in e-tourism as it is one of the importance sources for making
travelling decisions in the form of word of mouth and interpersonal influences. (Litvin
et al. 2008) Research of (Mill & Morrison 1985) states that individuals must be
provided information about the products and services through the role of marketing
which will create awareness among the customers for the same and the positive
influence will bring satisfying personal experience. The third variable used in this study
is service quality evaluation which is the overall judgment which a customer makes
about a service and is totally based on kind of service quality offered to him by the
service provider (Bigne et al. 2001). Another research of (Ho & Lee 2007) shows that
e-travel service quality is strongly capable of predicting customers behavior in terms of
loyalty and satisfaction. Thus the past research shows that the variables used in this
study affects customer’s behavior in e tourism in some way or the other.
The main reason for choosing Taiwan as a subject of the study is because of the fact
that being a developed country most of its population is aware about the use of internet.
In the support of the latter statement (Anon 2013a) statistics show that 80% of the total
population in Taiwan is accustomed of the use of internet, also (Anon 2013b) shows
that the Taiwanese population currently is dominated by youth and middle aged people.
So doing a study over the age group between 16-35 years in Taiwan was considered for
this research.
The main aim of this study is to identify the determinants which impact potential
customer’s behavior in e-tourism industry in the perspective of Taiwan’s economy and
also to show their interrelationship with each other. Final results of this study shows
that all the three factors (generation of stimulus, Information search and Service
quality) were found to be affecting the consumer behavior (satisfaction, dissatisfaction)
in e-tourism industry in Taiwan.

2

Tourism and Hospitality Management, Vol. 21, No. 1, pp. 1-17, 2015
A. Bajpai, C.W. Lee: CONSUMER BEHAVIOR IN E-TOURISM SERVICES: A CASE OF TAIWAN

THEORETICAL BACKGROUND AND CONCEPTUAL MODEL
The current study focuses on the determinants which influences the consumer behavior
while making decisions for e-tourism services. Although previous research has
discussed about the changes internet has brought affecting pre and post purchase
decisions of the customer, but all sectors have not been affected with the same
intensity. In case of tourism industry it is offering intangible services and offers thus
the characteristics of tourism industry suits highly and particularly for following
internet marketing (Dominique & Dimanche 2009).
Relationship between e-tourism services and consumer behavior is been studied and
explained in previous studies. These theories are basically developed for the better
understanding of consumer’s decisions and behavior. The main aim of these kinds of
studies is to find out the principals in consumer behavior to be able to follow practical
implementation and in order to give advices and prediction of the influences caused in
consumer’s behavior (Kroeber-Riel & Weinberg 1999). The electronic distribution of
tourism information has a major impact over consumer behavior. A large number of
consumers use websites to inform and purchase services offered by e-tourism industry
(Nedelea & Alina 2010). Another study based on consumer behavior over e-tourism
services has suggested that e-tourism markets have till now seem to affect consumer’s
behavior in pre purchase of products that means consumers have not extended pre
purchase search and further to add they look for convenience relative objectives for etourism services. (Mills & Law 2004). Study of (Stockdale 2007) states that in etourism the major challenge for the firms is to retain customers and the use of selfservice technologies benefits firms in terms of cost savings and in retaining the
customer.
Previous research has discussed a lot about generation of stimulus affecting the
consumer behavior in e tourism services. (Mittal 1988) stated that the stimulus is
generated based on the influence of past experiences, desires and interest of the
customer’s product/service use, the more lucrative the product/service the more it will
be appraised by the customer. Results of the study of (Bigne et al. 2001) shows that
stimulus generated in an individual is highly responsible for the changes in behavior
that occur during buying of tourism services, thus the image of the services should be
constantly improved. In order to receive customer’s loyalty, e-tourism industry needs to
develop technology for recording customer’s reaction to their generation of stimulus
and to give them more customized products and services as per their personal
preferences (Buhalis & O’Connor 2005). Similarly in another research of (Iso-Ahola
1983) author has proved that the desire of a customer to gain certain personal rewards
in terms of planning a travel is greatly influenced by a generation of stimulus.
Another important dependent variable of this study is Information Search. Which is
been discussed as a very important determinant in the past research with respect to
consumer behavior in e- tourism services. Study of (Xiang & Gretzel 2010) concludes
that in the present scenario the travel specific sites such as trip advisor and virtual
tourist are becoming popular and are becoming deeply involved in providing primary
online travel information. However in study of (Tapscott & Williams 2006) it was clear
that by the changing face of internet, content generation is becoming easy with every

3

Tourism and Hospitality Management, Vol. 21, No. 1, pp. 1-17, 2015
A. Bajpai, C.W. Lee: CONSUMER BEHAVIOR IN E-TOURISM SERVICES: A CASE OF TAIWAN

passing day and thus the current customer gets more power over how he can make use
of the information given over the internet.
The search engines are playing a very dominant role in present time and are helping
customers by providing them the information required by social media sites, blogs and
other different sources where the customer can get a fair idea by reading the comments
of previous buyers (word of mouth) based on their own personal experience of the
specific e-tourism service. (Xiang & Gretzel 2010).
(Fodness & Murray 1997) have stated information search as one of the important part
of the purchase decision process which got revolutionized with the popularity of
internet. They have also mentioned that out of the factors which influence information
search process prior visits (personal experience) and choice of destination (awareness)
are to name a few. Study of (Cotte et al. 2006) found that information search and online
shopping behavior are highly correlated due to the utilitarian consumption (everyday
usage).
The third and last dependent variable in this study is service quality evaluation, (Ho &
Lee 2007) in their research have proved that e-tourism service quality evaluation scale
has strong predictive capability when it comes to their relation with online customer
satisfaction (consumer behavior) and the loyalty intentions of the customers. In a
similar study of (Mill & Morrison 1985) it was investigated that the perceived service
quality is a multi-dimensional construct which plays an important role in determining
customer satisfaction which leads to the consumer behavior prediction when it comes
to e-tourism services.
Tourism industry is an information dependent business and internet is helping this
industry to provide a dynamic platform for information supply and exchange. However
the information provided on the websites meets the expectations of the users is very
crucial and helps in determining the consumer behavior in terms of e-tourism services
offered (Ho & Lee 2007). (Otto & Ritchie 1996) have also defined service quality
evaluation as the capability to understand and manage the true consumer behavior in
terms of services rendered.
Thus past research offers some support in identifying the determinants affecting the
consumer behavior in e-tourism industry. However the present study investigates the
determinants further in perspective of Taiwan’s economy, the present research has
followed Oliver’s conceptual model (Oliver 1980) in order to develop a new model
which is specifically based on determinants affecting consumer behavior in e- tourism
service industry.
This study is unique from the past researches done in two dimensions; firstly this is the
first kind of research done over consumer behavior of youth specifically in e-tourism
industry in Taiwanese economy perspective and secondly as it is based on the data
collected from the Taiwanese youth directly and is empirically evaluated so we believe
its results will help the organizations for making the e-tourism industry more consumer
oriented in case of Taiwan by having a proper understanding of their consumer
behavior while making buying decisions in e-tourism sector.

4

Tourism and Hospitality Management, Vol. 21, No. 1, pp. 1-17, 2015
A. Bajpai, C.W. Lee: CONSUMER BEHAVIOR IN E-TOURISM SERVICES: A CASE OF TAIWAN

Conceptual model
Use of internet by customer’s is playing a much more important role when it comes to
decision making process; and has turned out to be a major subject for the study of
consumer behavior research in the last few decades (e- shopping acceptance). Thus it
holds importance in most of the industries including that of e- tourism. Therefore this
study contribute to research in terms of e-tourism behavior during their decision
making process by developing a new model of “e-tourism loyalty” which is adapted
from the previous model of disconfirmation period (Oliver 1980).
Main idea of Oliver’s model of disconfirmation was to integrate the suggested
antecedents and few hypothesized consequences into a framework of satisfaction
related concepts and topics. Also to get a clear picture about the kind of relationships
existing between expectations, disconfirmation and satisfaction of the consumer with
that of purchase intention, consumer behavior and criteria which is been used in
previous decades.
Figure 1: Oliver’s model of disconfirmation

Expectations

Disconfirmation

Satisfaction/
Dissatisfaction
(CSD)

Performance

Source: Oliver’s model 1980)

Although Oliver’s model of disconfirmation was based upon finding out the
relationship existing between expectations, performance and disconfirmation period
and all together their impact over consumer behavior; And the model was not based
over any specific industry but was developed in order to have a proper understanding of
consumer behavior in a general process of buying products or services. Therefore
Oliver’s model was used in this study as a base for deriving and developing the new
model of e-tourism loyalty.

5

Tourism and Hospitality Management, Vol. 21, No. 1, pp. 1-17, 2015
A. Bajpai, C.W. Lee: CONSUMER BEHAVIOR IN E-TOURISM SERVICES: A CASE OF TAIWAN

In previous studies importance of internet in every industry is been discussed by many
researchers, the best model to identify, describe and explain the theories related to
acceptance of internet as information was ”information system success model”(Delone
& Mclean 2003) , This addressed the issue of acceptance of internet in almost all
industries successfully. Thus looking at the importance of internet in today’s industry
in current scenario it was worth developing the model of e-tourism loyalty using
Oliver’s model and going through different theories of the past which successfully
studied about the determinants like generation of stimulus, information search and
service quality affecting and having an impact over the loyalty of the consumer
(consumer behavior) in perspective of e-tourism industry for the Taiwanese economy.
Figure 2: Model of e-tourism loyalty

Generation of stimulus
1. Desire
2. Influences
3. Interest

Service quality evaluation
(Disconfirmation period)

Consumer behavior
in e-tourism services
(Loyalty, Satisfaction
or Dissatisfaction)

Information search
1. Awareness
2. Personal experience
3. Word of mouth

Source: Research results

Model of e-tourism loyalty
This model consists of three independent variables namely generation of stimulus,
information search and service quality evaluation (disconfirmation period) and the
dependent variable is taken as consumer behavior in e Tourism which is measured by
loyalty, satisfaction or dissatisfaction of the customer.
This model supports the old theories and shows that desire, influences and interest are
major factors which evokes generation of stimulus for a customer to make him
interested in using e-tourism services (Edensor 2006),(Bigne et al. 2001). As a result of
which the customer start collecting information about the services provided by etourism services matching his own desires to travel. Phenomenon of information search
is influenced by the awareness generated by the information given on the websites, by

6

Tourism and Hospitality Management, Vol. 21, No. 1, pp. 1-17, 2015
A. Bajpai, C.W. Lee: CONSUMER BEHAVIOR IN E-TOURISM SERVICES: A CASE OF TAIWAN

using his personal experience and electronic word of mouth. (Litvin et al. 2008),
(Xiang & Gretzel 2010). The third determinant that is service quality evaluation is the
post purchase phenomenon of the product or services which is affected by information
search and generation of stimulus. During this period customer compares the services
offered by e-tourism service and his own requirements and evaluates on a scale, if it
was as per his/her requirements. Service quality is been considered as one of the most
necessary and winning phenomenon affecting consumer behavior in e-tourism and has
been stated as having a strong predictive capability for customers loyalty intentions.
(Augustyn & Ho 1998),(Ho & Lee 2007).The final step of the model is where either the
customer is satisfied and becomes a loyal customer for the future or else attains
dissatisfaction and quits taking any further services from the specific e-tourism service
provider. Thus we can see that consumer behavior of a customer in e-tourism services
perspective is backed up by given theories and research done in the past.
So we developed the hypotheses for this research based on the adapted new model of etourism loyalty in order to find out if the determinants considered in this research affect
the consumer behavior of the Taiwanese youth or not. The developed hypotheses of the
study are given below:
Hypotheses and research methodology
This research hypothesized that a high sense of knowing the importance versed in
providing the e-tourism services to the end user; so that their demands can be met, if
we are aware of the determinants affecting the consumer behavior in final decision
making process, with reference to e-tourism services. This intrinsic loyalty and
satisfaction would then be expected to influence customers to buy more e-tourism
related products and services. This study investigated the important determinants which
can affect the consumer behavior and lead them to the state of loyalty and satisfaction
specifically in Taiwan’s perspective in terms of using e-tourism services. Thus based
on above idea and supported by the literature review, three hypotheses were offered:
Hypothesis 1: Consumer behavior in e-tourism services is significantly influenced by
generation of stimulus.
Hypothesis 2: Consumer behavior in e-tourism services is significantly influenced by
information search.
Hypothesis 3: Consumer behavior in e-tourism services is significantly influenced by
service quality evaluation (Disconfirmation period).

RESEARCH METHODOLOGY
Development of the questionnaire and data collection
To proof the accuracy of the above mentioned model an online questionnaire based on
Likert scale with a measurement scale of (1=strongly disagree – 5= strongly agree) was
designed using google drive. The questionnaire was created in English and then was
translated into Chinese, and only local Taiwanese people were considered to fill the
questionnaire and consisted of five sections. Section 1 was based on Generation of
7

Tourism and Hospitality Management, Vol. 21, No. 1, pp. 1-17, 2015
A. Bajpai, C.W. Lee: CONSUMER BEHAVIOR IN E-TOURISM SERVICES: A CASE OF TAIWAN

stimulus related questions (four in number), section 2 consisted of five questions based
on information search, section three consist of questions related to service quality
evaluation (three in number), section four was created to measure dependent variable
(consumer behavior in e-tourism) and had four questions in total. The last section five
included the demographic factors. The questions created for the questionnaire were
totally based on previous proven statements from the past researches.
Data was collected from the local consumers by posting the questionnaire link over
travelling based social network webpages and different communities which are popular
among Taiwanese youth interested in tourism activities. These social networks were
selected based on kind of information related to e-tourism products and services they
provide and how frequently are visited by the interested Taiwanese youth. The
webpages used were a part of Facebook, Google plus and few local social networking
websites; some responses were also received by emailing the questionnaire link directly
to the known respondents.
A total of 417 respondents took part in filling the questionnaire, the responses were
directly collected in the form of an excel sheet created in google drive which was later
on downloaded finally for finding and estimating the results for this research using
SPSS 22.0 statistical software. Final number of respondents administered in this
research was 402 out of 417.
Data analysis methods
To test the suggested hypotheses, Principle component analysis using varimax rotation
followed by reliability tests, Pearson correlation test and regression analysis were
deployed to find out which determinant among the three affects the consumer behavior
in the process of e-tourism.

RESULTS
Descriptive statistics for demographics
Table 1 provides the demographic statistics of the total participants who participated in
the survey of the given research. Among the 402 total respondents, 155(38.55 %) were
male and 247 (61.55 %) were females. 252 (62.7%) of the respondents age lied
between 16-25 years and 150 respondents lied between the age group of 26-35 years.
205 (51.0%) respondents were found to be at a graduate level 171(42.5%) were PhD’s
and 26 (6.5%) respondents were undergraduates. 210 (52.2%) respondents were
working as full time and 192 (47.8%) respondents were found to have a part time job.

8

Tourism and Hospitality Management, Vol. 21, No. 1, pp. 1-17, 2015
A. Bajpai, C.W. Lee: CONSUMER BEHAVIOR IN E-TOURISM SERVICES: A CASE OF TAIWAN

Table 1: Descriptive statistics for demographics

Frequency

Valid frequency
percent (%)

Male

155

38.55%

Female

247

61.44%

16-25 years

252

62.7%

26-35 years

150

37.3%

Undergraduate

26

6.5%

Graduate

205

51.0%

PhD.

171

42.5%

Part Time

192

47.8%

Full Time

210

52.2%

Question

Gender

Age group

Education

Job status
Source: Research results

Descriptive statistics for variables
Descriptive statistics for variables is provided in table 2 where the responses having a
mean score above three were considered to be supporting the variables (determinants).
The first determinant generation of stimulus had a mean score of 3.8520 which means
generation of stimulus plays an important role in determining the consumer behavior
for e-tourism services. Similarly for information search, disconfirmation period had a
mean score of 3.8520, 3.9483, 3.8408 respectively. Thus all variables seem to affect the
consumer behavior in e-tourism services.
Table 2: Descriptive statistics for variables
Variables
Generation of stimulus
Information search
Service quality evaluation
Consumer behavior in e-tourism
services

No. of
observations
402
402
402

3.8520
3.9483
3.8408

Standard
deviation
0.74814
0.61251
0.62689

402

3.9204

0.70393

Mean

Scale (1=Strongly Disagree - 5 Strongly Agree)
Source: Research results

9

Tourism and Hospitality Management, Vol. 21, No. 1, pp. 1-17, 2015
A. Bajpai, C.W. Lee: CONSUMER BEHAVIOR IN E-TOURISM SERVICES: A CASE OF TAIWAN

Reliability and data reduction tests
In order to determine the appropriateness of factor analysis and to check that the data is
reliable for running the tests, reliability tests were undertaken where value of Cronbach
alpha was tested for every determinant used in the study in order to check the internal
consistency of all the determinants used in the study. All the results for reliability tests
and principle component analysis are mentioned in table 3 and table 4 respectively.
For generation of stimulus the value of Cronbach alpha was 0.757 which is considered
as a very good value for internal consistency, while performing principle component
analysis for generation of stimulus all the items got loaded in the single component and
were found to be closely related and supporting the same concept with the Eigen value
of 2.314% and a variance of 57.842%.
The value of Cronbach alpha for information search was found to be 0.779 which is a
very good value of internal consistency, the principle component analysis for
information search all the items loaded in a single component thus were found to be
closely related and supporting the same concept with the Eigen value of 2.799 and a
variance of 55.990%.
Service quality evaluation’s value of Cronbach alpha was 0.664 which is an above
average value of internal consistency; also while doing the principal component
analysis the components loaded in a single component with the value of Eigen value
1.612 with a variance of 53.729%. Thus they were found to be closely related and
supporting the same concept.
For the dependent variable consumer behavior in e-tourism services the value of
Cronbach alpha was 0.838 which is an excellent value of internal consistency, in
principle component analysis all the items got loaded in a single component and were
found to be connected and supporting the same concept the Eigen value was 0.664 with
a variance of 53.729%.
For all the components together the value of Cronbach alpha was 0.911 which is an
excellent value of internal consistency.
Table 3: Reliability statistics
Variables
All variables
Generation of stimulus
Information search
Service quality evaluation
Consumer behavior in e-tourism
services
Source: Research results

10

Cronbach alpha
Value
0.911
0.757
0.779
0.664
0.838

No of items.
16
4
5
3
4

Tourism and Hospitality Management, Vol. 21, No. 1, pp. 1-17, 2015
A. Bajpai, C.W. Lee: CONSUMER BEHAVIOR IN E-TOURISM SERVICES: A CASE OF TAIWAN

Table 4: Initial component matrix for all variables (Extraction method: Principal
component analysis.) Varimax rotation
Variables

Eigen value

Generation of stimulus
Information search
Service quality evaluation
Consumer behavior in e-tourism
services

2.314
2.799
1.612

Percentage of
variance
57.842%
55.990%
53.729%

2.694

67.360%

Source: Research results

Pearson correlation test and multiple regression analysis
This test was conducted to check the correlation among the variables (dependent and
independent) used in the study and finally multiple regression analysis is undertaken to
get the final outcome and results of the hypotheses offered in the given study. The
results of Pearson correlation test and multiple regression analysis are mentioned below
in table 5 and table 6 respectively.
Hypothesis 1: Consumer behavior in e-tourism services is significantly influenced
by generation of stimulus
In the Pearson correlation test a significant correlation was seen between generation of
stimulus and consumer behavior with a p-value of 0.000 which is close to zero and is
less than the alpha level (0.01). Our data here provides the information that Generation
of stimulus determinant is significantly correlated with the consumer behavior in etourism services. Also in the regression analysis the p- value is significant (0.000) and
is less than the level of alpha (0.01) thus looking at the significant results we accept the
hypothesis 1 and reject the null hypothesis.
Hypothesis 2: Consumer behavior in e-tourism services is significantly influenced
by information search
The Pearson correlation test shows a significant correlation between Information search
and consumer behavior as the p-value was found to be 0.000 which is close to zero and
is less than the alpha level (0.01). The results of regression analysis also show the
significant p-value (0.000) which is less than the level of alpha (0.01) so looking at the
significant results we accept the hypothesis 2 and reject the null hypothesis.
Hypothesis 3: Consumer behavior in e-tourism services is significantly influenced
by service quality evaluation (Disconfirmation period)
The results of Pearson correlation test were found to be having a significant correlation
between service quality evaluation and consumer behavior in e-tourism services as the
p- value was 0.000 which is close to zero and is less than the alpha level (0.01) also the

11

Tourism and Hospitality Management, Vol. 21, No. 1, pp. 1-17, 2015
A. Bajpai, C.W. Lee: CONSUMER BEHAVIOR IN E-TOURISM SERVICES: A CASE OF TAIWAN

p- value was significant (0.000) in the regression analysis which is less than the level of
alpha (0.01) so we accept the hypothesis 3 and reject the null hypothesis.
Table 5: Correlation with consumer behavior
Variables
Generation of stimulus
Information search
Service quality evaluation

Coefficient
(r)
0.652**
0.711**
0.609**

Significance
(p)
0.000
0.000
0.000

*. Correlation is significant at the 0.05 level (2-tailed).
**. Correlation is significant at the 0.01 level (2-tailed).
Source: Research results

Table 6: Regression analysis results
Hypothesis

Coefficient
(β)

P-Value

H1 – Consumer behavior in e-tourism is influenced by
generation of stimulus

0.265

0.000

H2 – Consumer behavior in e-tourism is influenced by
information search

0.384

0.000

H3 – Consumer behavior in e-tourism is influenced by
service quality evaluation(disconfirmation period)

0.220

0.000

DISCUSSION
This study was undertaken to find out the determinants affecting the consumer behavior
in e-tourism services (dependent variable) for the youth (16-35 years) in perspective of
Taiwan. Three different determinants (generation of stimulus, Information search and
service quality evaluation) were taken as the independent variable based and supported
by previous studies and research. The final results depict that all the three independent
variables significantly affect the consumer behavior in e-tourism services.

CONCLUSION
The final results of this research shows that all the three determinants considered in the
present research were found to be significant (p-value=0.000) which means that the
dependent variable of the study (consumer behavior in e-tourism services) is highly
influenced and affected positively by all the three independent variables (generation of
stimulus, information search and service quality evaluation) in the case of Taiwan.

12

Tourism and Hospitality Management, Vol. 21, No. 1, pp. 1-17, 2015
A. Bajpai, C.W. Lee: CONSUMER BEHAVIOR IN E-TOURISM SERVICES: A CASE OF TAIWAN

To explain further 80% of the total population of Taiwan is youth and is accustomed to
the use of internet frequently (IWS, 2013). Taiwanese youth’s consumer behavior is
affected by the stimulus generated by their own desires and interests in travel and are
influenced by many applications present online for instance blogs, articles and social
networking. These applications help the customers to know and understand the working
and significance of a specific e-tourism service which creates new desires to plan a
travel using the e-tourism service network and the consumer finally moves towards the
next step of information search.
The second determinant information search had a significant p- value in our results so
we conclude that consumer behavior in e-tourism services is significantly influenced by
information search. In order to explain more clearly we can say that customers after
being influenced from the generated stimulus develops curiosity and he tends to collect
information about e-tourism services; which he uses by generating awareness about the
services by using distinct and unique ways based on their own personal experiences
related to the use of e-tourism services. While searching information the customer gets
influenced by the experiences of the fellowmen and gathers the required information by
using word of mouth or digital word of mouth and he makes the final buying decision
for the e-tourism services and moves to the next step of service quality evaluation.
The third and final determinant of this study is service quality evaluation; our results
have shown the significant p-value for this determinant as well, this step is the post
purchase step where the consumer has already bought the travel product online and has
experienced the services provided personally. In this stage the customer evaluates the
services provided to him by comparing them to their desires have been met or not, the
quality of the services promised was up to the mark or not, as mentioned at the time of
buying product online. Finally based on his experiences he evaluates the service quality
and comes to a level of satisfaction or dissatisfaction.
Thus if the customer finds the service evaluation up to the mark he decides to stay loyal
to the present service provider in order to fulfill his future travelling requirements
moved by his satisfaction on the other hand if the customer finds himself dissatisfied he
decides never to use the given service again.
The original and newly developed models used in this study seems to be perfectly
correlated with the principals and theoretical explanations used in this study in terms of
Taiwan. Also the above mentioned phenomenon very clearly defines that the consumer
behavior in e-tourism services in Taiwan’s perspective is very much affected by all the
three determinants which were used as a part of this research (generation of stimulus,
information search and service quality evaluation).
Implementations
The results of this study have theoretical as well as managerial implementations. At the
managerial level the managers can have a fair idea of how e-tourism services need to
be improved in Taiwan which can make the buying process smooth, convenient and
easy; which in turn will help the business of e-tourism services to grow in a better and
broader way.

13

Tourism and Hospitality Management, Vol. 21, No. 1, pp. 1-17, 2015
A. Bajpai, C.W. Lee: CONSUMER BEHAVIOR IN E-TOURISM SERVICES: A CASE OF TAIWAN

Theoretically readers will have a fair idea of consumer’s behavior while buying etourism services in case of Taiwan and they will also have a deep understanding of the
kinds of models and methodologies used in these kinds of studies.
Limitations
This study attempted to establish a strong base for the future studies related to
consumer behavior in e-tourism services. This research is been undertaken for the age
group of (16-35 years) and the sample taken was from Taiwan so the results of this
study could vary if the same kind of research is carried on in different countries. Also
the determinants used in this study though were supported by past literature but there
are many other determinants as well which could influence consumer behavior which
could be considered and studied for determining the consumer behavior in e-tourism
services process for Taiwan as well as for other countries.
Future research
For the future researchers we recommend to carry out the future research by
considering a different age group to that of this study. The next level research can also
be based on testing the determinants for two or more different countries together and
comparing the final results to find out the difference between the consumer behavior in
e-tourism services between the sample countries. The comparison could base on
studying about consumer behavior in e-tourism services for a developed and
developing nation so that a clear picture of the major differences in both nations in
terms of consumer behavior for e-tourism can be obtained. We also recommend the
future researchers to develop a new model based on past recent studies so as to get a
fair idea of recent changes going on in e-tourism services which could be helpful for
studying the consumer behavior in e-tourism services.

REFERENCES
Anon (2013a), Internet world stats.
Anon (2013b), National Statistics, Taiwan. Available at: http://eng.stat.gov.tw/mp.asp?mp=5.
Anon (2014), World Tourism Organization. Available at: http://www2.unwto.org/.
Ashworth, G. & Goodall, B. (1988), Marketing in the tourism industry the promotion of destination regions,
Routledge, London.
Augustyn, M. & Ho, S.K. (1998), Service Quality and Tourism, Journal of Travel Research, 37(1), pp. 71–
75.
Bigne, E.J., Sanchez, I.M. & Sanchez, J. (2001), Tourism image , evaluation variables and after purchase
behaviour :inter-relationship, Tourism Management, 22, pp. 607–616.
Bitner, M.J. (1992), servicescapes: The impact of physical surroundings on customers and employees,
Journal of Marketing, 56, pp. 57–71.
Bolton, R.N. & Drew, J.H. (1991), A multi-stage model of customers’ assessments of service quality and
value, Journal of Consumer Research, 17(march), pp. 375–84.
Buhalis, D. & O’Connor, P. (2005), Information Communication Technology Revolutionizing Tourism,
Tourism Recreation Research, 30(3), pp. 7–16.
Carman, J.M. (1990), Consumer perceptions of service quality: an assessment of the SERVQUAL
dimensions, Journal of Retailing, 66(1), pp. 33–55.
Cohen, E. (2004), Toward a sociology of international tourism, Tourism: The nature and structure of
tourism, (spring), pp. 174–187.
Cotte, J. et al. (2006), Pleasure or utility? Time planning style and Web usage behaviors, Journal of
Interactive Marketing, 20(1), pp. 45–57.

14

Tourism and Hospitality Management, Vol. 21, No. 1, pp. 1-17, 2015
A. Bajpai, C.W. Lee: CONSUMER BEHAVIOR IN E-TOURISM SERVICES: A CASE OF TAIWAN
Cronin, J.. & Taylor, S. (1992), Measuring service quality: A reexamination and extension, Journal of
Marketing, 56(3), pp. 55–68.
Cronin, J.J., Brady, M.K. & Hult, G.T.M. (2000), Assessing the effects of quality, value, and customer
satisfaction on consumer behavioral intentions in service environments, Journal of Retailing,
76(2), pp. 193–218.
Delone, W.H. & Mclean, E.R. (2003), The DeLone and McLean Model of Information Systems Success : A
Ten-Year Update, Journal of Management Information Systems, 19(4), pp. 9–30.
Dominique, J. & Dimanche, F. (2009), Investing in technology for tourism activities: Perspectives and
challenges, Technovation, 29(9), pp. 576–579.
Edensor, T. (2006), Sensing tourist spaces. Travels in paradox:Remapping Tourism, Rowman & Littlefield
Publishers.
Fodness, D. & Murray, B. (1997), Tourist information search, Annals of Tourism Research, 24(3), pp. 503–
523.
Giddens, A. (1999), Modernity and self-identity, self and society in the late modern age 2nd ed., Stanford
University press.
Goossens, C. (2000), Tourism information and pleasure motivation, Annals of Tourism Research, 27(2), pp.
301–321.
Ho, C.-I. & Lee, Y.-L. (2007), The development of an e-travel service quality scale, Tourism Management,
28(6), pp. 1434–1449.
Horne, D. (1994), The un-accidental tourist—how to be a more intelligent and useful traveller and save the
world, The Australian Magazine, pp. 10–16.
Iso-Ahola, S.E. (1983), Towards a social psychology of recreational travel, Leisure Studies, 2(1), pp. 45–56.
Kroeber-Riel, W. & Weinberg, P. (1999), Konsumentenverhalten, Verlag Vahlen.
Litvin, S.W., Goldsmith, R.E. & Pan, B. (2008), Electronic word-of-mouth in hospitality and tourism
management, Tourism Management, 29(3), pp. 458–468.
Mills, J.E. & Law, R. (2004), Handbook of consumer behavior tourism and the internet, Journal of travel and
tourism marketing, 2(3).
Mill, R.C. & Morrison, A.M. (1985), The Tourism System: An Introductory Text., Englewood Cliffs NJ:
Prentice Hall.
Mittal, B. (1988), The role of affective choice mode in the consumer purchase of expressive products,
Journal of Economic Psychology, 9, pp. 499–524.
Murphy, P.E. (2013), Tourism: A community approach, Routledge.
Nedelea, A. & Alina, B. (2010), E-tourism and tourism services consumer protection, Amfiteatru Economic
Journal, 12(28), pp. 492–503.
Oliver, R.L. (1980), A Cognitive Model of the Antecedents and Consequences of Satisfaction Decisions,
Journal of Marketing Research, 17(4), pp. 460–469.
Otto, J.E. & Ritchie, B.J.R. (1996), The service experience in tourism, Tourism Management, 17(3), pp. 165–
174.
Roberts, J. & Lattin, J.M. (1991), Development and testing of a model of consideration set composition,
Journal of Marketing Research, 28(4), pp. 429–440.
Rothschild, M. (1984), Perspectives on involvement: current problems and future directions, Advances in
Consumer Research, 11, pp. 216–217.
Shu, T.-C., Crompton, J.L. & Wilson, V.L. (2002), An empirical investigation of the relationships between
service quality, satisfaction and behavioural intentions among visitors to a wildlife refuge, Journal
of Leisure Research, 34(1), pp. 1–24.
Spreng, R.A., Mackenzie, S.B. & Olshavsky, R.W. (1996), A reexamination of the determinants of consumer
satisfaction, Journal of Marketing, 60(July), pp. 15–33.
Stamboulis, Y. & Skayannis, P. (2003), Innovation strategies and technology for experience-based tourism,
Tourism Management, 24(1), pp. 35–43.
Stockdale, R. (2007), Managing customer relationships in the self-service environment of e-tourism, Journal
of Vacation Marketing, 13(3), pp. 205–219.
Tapscott, D. & Williams, A.D. (2006), Wikinomics:How mass collaboration changes everything., Penguin
group.
Uysal, M. & Jurowski, C. (1994), Testing the Push and Pull Factors, Annals of Tourism Research, 21(4), pp.
844–846.
Werthner, H. & Klein, S. (1999), ICT and the Changing Landscape of global tourism distribution, The
changing Landscape of Global Tourism, 9(4), pp. 256–262.
Xiang, Z. & Gretzel, U. (2010), Role of social media in online travel information search, Tourism
Management, 31(2), pp. 179–188.

15

Tourism and Hospitality Management, Vol. 21, No. 1, pp. 1-17, 2015
A. Bajpai, C.W. Lee: CONSUMER BEHAVIOR IN E-TOURISM SERVICES: A CASE OF TAIWAN

APPENDIX: Questionnaire used in the research
Evaluation Scale:
(1) Strongly Disagree (2) Disagree (3) Neutral (4) Agree (5) Strongly Agree
Questions

References used

Section 1 Generation of Stimulus
1

Do you agree that People plan travel because of their
intrinsic desires?

(Uysal & Jurowski
1994)

2

Do you agree that people plan travelling because of the
desire of quality life and to escape from regular routine?

(Giddens 1999),
(Horne 1994)

3

Do you agree that e-tourism services should always work
on technologies as per customer’s interests?

(Stamboulis &
Skayannis 2003)

Do you agree that e-tourism image is influenced by
individual behavior of customers?

(Ashworth &
Goodall 1988),
(Cohen
2004),(Milman &
Abraham 1995)

4

Section 2 Information Search
5

Do you think that awareness generated by e tourism
services influences customers buying decisions?

6

Do you agree that personal experience strongly influence
use of e-tourism services?

7

Do you agree that a satisfactory personal experience is
one of the best promotion tool for any e-tourism service?

8

Do you agree that electronic word of mouth is one of the
important information sources while making a purchase
decision from any tourism website?

9

Do you agree that digital word of mouth induces new
ways of analyzing, interpreting and managing the
customer’s influences over each other?

(Roberts & Lattin
1991)

(Murphy 2013)

(Litvin et al. 2008)

Section 3 Disconfirmation Period
10

Do you agree that e-service quality is inter-related with
customer satisfaction?

(Cronin et al.
2000),(Spreng &
Mackoy 1996)

11

Do you agree global evaluation of e-service quality
influences customer behavior?

(Bitner 1992),
(Bolton & Drew
1991),(Carman 1990)

16

Tourism and Hospitality Management, Vol. 21, No. 1, pp. 1-17, 2015
A. Bajpai, C.W. Lee: CONSUMER BEHAVIOR IN E-TOURISM SERVICES: A CASE OF TAIWAN

12

Do you agree that Information quality, security, website
functionality customer relationship and responsiveness
are the most important components for e-tourism
services?

(Shu et al. 2002)

Section 4 Customer Satisfaction/Dissatisfaction
13

Do you agree that e-tourism services must take special
care of the image they create by providing services as it
affects customer’s satisfaction?

(Oliver 1980),
(Spreng et al. 1996),
(Tse & Wilton 1988)

14

Do you agree customer satisfaction is a result we get by
comparing expectations and perception of the
performance of e-tourism services?

(Cronin & Taylor
1992)

15

Do you think that customer satisfaction influences post
purchase behavior in e-tourism?

16

Do you think Quality of e-tourism services affects
customer’s satisfaction positively?

(Bigne et al. 2001)

Demographic Factors
Gender
Age
Educational Qualification
Job status
Marital status

Male
Female
16-25
26-35
36-45 45 above
Undergraduate Graduate PhD.
Part time Fulltime
Married
Single

Akansha Bajpai, PhD, Student
Chung Yuan Christian University, Chungli Taiwan
200 Chung Pei Rd., Chung Li City, Taiwan 32023, R.O.C.
E-mail: 20f.akansha@gmail.com
Mobile: +886 978473221
Cheng-Wen Lee, PhD, Professor
International Business Department
Chung Yuan Christian University, Chungli Taiwan
200 Chung Pei Rd., Chung Li City, Taiwan 32023, R.O.C.
E-mail: chengwen@cycu.edu.tw
Mobile: +886 935333837

17

