Tourism Management 51 (2015) 174e185

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Tourism Management
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/tourman

Why do travelers trust TripAdvisor? Antecedents of trust towards
consumer-generated media and its inﬂuence on recommendation
adoption and word of mouth*
Raffaele Filieri a, *, Salma Alguezaui b, Fraser McLeay a
a
b

Newcastle Business School, Northumbria University, City Campus East 1, NE1 8ST, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom
Research Assistant at Newcastle Business School, Northumbria University, United Kingdom

h i g h l i g h t s

g r a p h i c a l a b s t r a c t

 The study tests a model of antecedents and consequences of trust towards consumer-generated media
(CGM).
 Information quality, website quality,
and customer satisfaction inﬂuence
trust towards CGM.
 Information quality predicts source
credibility, customer satisfaction, and
website quality.
 Trust inﬂuences consumers' intention to follow other users' advice and
to foster positive word of mouth.

a r t i c l e i n f o

a b s t r a c t

Article history:
Received 27 August 2014
Accepted 6 May 2015
Available online 4 June 2015

The proliferation of fake and paid online reviews means that building and maintaining consumer trust is
a challenging task for websites hosting consumer-generated content. This study tests a model of antecedents and consequences of trust for consumer-generated media (CGM). Five factors are proposed for
building consumer trust towards CGM: source credibility, information quality, website quality, customer
satisfaction, user experience with CGM. Trust is expected to predict recommendation adoption and word
of mouth. Data from 366 users of CGM were analyzed through structural equation modeling and the
ﬁndings show that all the aforementioned factors with the exception of source credibility and user
experience inﬂuence consumer trust towards CGM. Trust towards a CGM website inﬂuences travel
consumers' intentions to follow other users' recommendations and fosters positive word of mouth.
Findings also show that information quality predicts source credibility, customer satisfaction, and
website quality.
© 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

Keywords:
Electronic word of mouth
Online trust
Website quality
Information quality
Customer satisfaction
Consumer-generated media
Recommendation adoption
Word of mouth

1. Introduction

*

Dr. Raffaele Filieri was the main contributor to the full production of this article
which draws upon research undertaken in a joint research project with Salma
Alguezaui and Professor Fraser McLeay.
* Corresponding author. Tel.: +44 (0) 191 227 3334.
E-mail addresses: raffaele.ﬁlieri@northumbria.ac.uk (R. Filieri), s.alguezaui@
gmail.com (S. Alguezaui), fraser.mcleay@northumbria.ac.uk (F. McLeay).
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.tourman.2015.05.007
0261-5177/© 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

Travelers increasingly rely on travel reviews to plan their trips
(Buhalis & Law, 2008; Litvin, Goldsmith, & Pan, 2008). Figures from
Google show that more than 80% of people research their holiday
online, and typically visit 26 websites and spend over 2 h in their
search for the right place and the right deal (Trend, 2013). In the
travel and tourism industry, consumers can bypass tour operators

R. Filieri et al. / Tourism Management 51 (2015) 174e185

and agents altogether to get advice from consumer-generated
media (CGM) e namely those websites that provide consumergenerated content (CGC) such as online consumer reviews. Travelers' recommendations on CGM inﬂuence consumer decisions of
where to go on holiday, which accommodation to book, and once
there, which attractions to visit and where to go to eat (Dickinger,
2011; Fotis, Buhalis, & Rossides, 2012; Gretzel & Yoo, 2008;
Sparks, Perkins, & Buckley, 2013). CGC such as online travel reviews allows consumers to identify the best hotels, restaurants, and
attractions, enabling travelers to avoid the worst products and
services, with the ﬁnal result of improving their decision making
(Filieri & McLeay, 2014).
Tourism research has demonstrated that CGC is perceived as
more trustworthy when compared to content from ofﬁcial destination websites, travel agents, and mass media (Dickinger, 2011;
Fotis et al., 2012). However, in recent years the mass media all
over the world have started to question the reliability of the most
popular CGM, reporting stories of hotel managers posing as customers or encouraging their staff to write fake glowing reviews
about their organization or even negative reviews about their
competitors (e.g. Smith, 2013; Streitﬁeld, 2011; Tuttle, 2012). In a
bid to expose the apparent failure of TripAdvisor to tackle the
phenomenon of fake reviews, a British businessman had set up a
fake restaurant which started to receive glowing reviews (Smith,
2013). Thus, it has become apparent to many users that not all
consumer reviews are necessarily written by real customers and
opinion spam is widespread in consumer review websites (Jindal &
Liu, 2008).
Due to this apparently uncontrollable rise of fake and promotional content on CGM, a concept such as trust acquires a
particular relevance. The questions that arise are: Why do travel
consumers trust CGM like TripAdvisor? Does trust in CGM affect
travel consumer behavior? The present research attempts to
provide an answer to these questions. Although trust has been
identiﬁed as a critical determinant of consumer purchase intentions in e-commerce (e.g. Flavi
an, Guinalíu, & Gurrea, 2006;
Hoffman, Novak, & Peralta, 1999; Jarvenpaa, Tractinsky, & Vitale,
2000; Lee & Turban, 2001; Yoon, 2002), little attention has
been paid to trust towards CGM (Ayeh, Au, & Law, 2013a; Yoo &
Gretzel, 2009) and whether trust affects travel consumer
behavior.
In order to ﬁll this gap, this study has tested a new model
measuring the antecedents and consequences of trust towards
CGM. This study relies on the Beldad, de Jong, and Steehouder
(2010) model of the antecedents of trust which attempts to measure the inﬂuence of factors like user experience, customer satisfaction, information quality, source credibility, and website quality,
on trust towards CGM.
Furthermore, this research explores the inﬂuence of trust on
two types of travel consumer behavior, namely: consumer
intention to spread the word about the CGM website they use to
other people in their network (word of mouth), and consumer
intention to adopt the advice received from CGM and purchase
the recommended product. These predictions were tested by
using structural equation modeling with data from 366 travel
users of CGM. The results have practical implications for travel
operators and for managers of CGM and other online operators in
the CGM industry.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. First, we review
the literature on electronic-word of mouth (e-WOM) and trust
with a particular focus on CGM. We then present the theoretical
framework and formulate the hypotheses of this study, subsequently we introduce the methodology and ﬁnally we present and
discuss the ﬁndings. Managerial implications, limitations and
future research directions conclude this paper.

175

2. Online reviews, consumer-generated media and trust
Consumers often try to get a feel for what a destination or accommodation will be like prior to their travel and for that reason
they look for online consumer reviews on websites such as
TripAdvisor, Yelp, and Holiday Watchdog. Online consumer
reviews e also known in the literature as CGC e can be considered
as a form of e-WOM, which refers to ‘any positive or negative
statement made by potential, actual or former consumers about
a product or company, which is made available to a multitude of
people and institutions via the Internet’ (Hennig-Thurau, Gwinner,
Walsh, & Gremler, 2004, p. 39).
Existing research in e-WOM has primarily focused on the motivation of customers who write reviews (e.g. Hennig-Thurau et al.,
2004), on the inﬂuence of consumer reviews on the purchase decisions of other customers (Senecal & Nantel, 2004; Smith, Menon, &
Sivakumar, 2005), and on the role of consumer reviews in affecting
the sales of different types of goods (Cui, Lui, & Guo, 2012; Dellarocas,
Zhang, & Awad, 2007; Godes & Mayzlin, 2004; Zhu & Zhang, 2010).
Research in the travel and tourism industry has provided evidence that online consumer reviews inﬂuence hotel rooms sales
(e.g. Ye, Law, & Gu, 2009) and travelers' purchase intentions about
which destination to travel to (Arsal, Backman, & Baldwin, 2008),
and which accommodation to book (e.g. Filieri & McLeay, 2014;
Gretzel & Yoo, 2008; Sparks & Browning, 2011; Vermeulen &
Seegers, 2009). Consumer-generated content have been found to
be equally important with respect to ofﬁcially provided information (Inversini, Cantoni, & Buhalis, 2009). Websites like TripAdvisor
have become so popular among travelers that they potentially inﬂuence the travel decisions of approximately 200 million users
who visit the website each month to get recommendations over
restaurants, accommodation, and destinations (TripAdvisor, 2014).
However, the mass media all over the world repeatedly
report stories of fake and promotional reviews posted on CGM
(e.g. Smith, 2013; Streitﬁeld, 2011; Tuttle, 2012). TripAdvisor has
recently been forced by the UK Advertising Standards Authority to
remove its ‘misleading’ slogans referring to the trustworthy and
honest nature of all the reviews hosted on its website. Thus, maintaining high levels of trust towards CGM seems to be an increasingly
challenging task for the managers of these online organizations.
Trust is deﬁned as ‘one party's conﬁdence in an exchange
partner's reliability and integrity’ (Morgan & Hunt, 1994, p. 23). In
this study, the focus is on online trust, which differs from ofﬂine
trust in that the object of online trust can be a website (Bart,
Shankar, Sultan, & Urban, 2005), that is CGM websites in this
study. Trust in an online retailer has been identiﬁed as a central
n et al., 2006;
success factor of e-commerce activities (e.g. Flavia
Hoffman et al., 1999; Jarvenpaa et al., 2000; Lee & Turban, 2001;
Yoon, 2002); however, little research has investigated the antecedents and the consequences of trust in e-WOM (Ayeh et al.,
2013a). Existing research in e-tourism on this topic has investigated the impact of online travel reviews on the credibility of hotels
(Sparks & Browning, 2011), and the role that reviews play in
reducing travelers' perceptions of risk when booking accommodation (Gretzel, Yoo, & Purifoy, 2007). The study that more closely
focuses on trust towards CGM is Ayeh et al. (2013a)'s on the determinants of travelers' attitudes and intentions towards usage of
CGC for travel planning. Ayeh et al. (2013a) adopted the Technology
Acceptance Model (TAM) to measure the impact of factors like
usefulness, perceived ease of use, homophily, perceived source
trustworthiness, and perceived enjoyment, which e with the
exception of perceived trustworthiness e were found to contribute
to intentions to use CGM for travel planning. However, in this study
we adopt the trust-building model developed by Beldad et al.
(2010), which will be discussed in the next section.

176

R. Filieri et al. / Tourism Management 51 (2015) 174e185

3. Theoretical background and research hypotheses
The academic literature has identiﬁed several antecedents of
trust and most of these studies focused on transacting websites
(Beldad et al., 2010). Beldad et al. (2010) reviewed the literature on
the antecedents of trust in commercial and non-commercial websites and classiﬁed them into three main categories: customer-based
antecedents, such as users' experience with the technology used
for the transaction, or user's tendency to trust; website-based antecedents, such as the quality of the website used or of the information; and organization/company-based antecedents such as
customers' experiences with online organizations.
Beldad et al.'s (2010) framework has been adopted in this study to
investigate the antecedents of trust towards CGM in the travel and
tourism industry. The main reason for adopting Beldad et al. (2010)'s
framework is that it is an online trust-building model that ﬁts both
commercial and non-commercial organizations, it has not yet
received empirical validation for CGM websites, and includes a
number of relationships that have not been tested before in a single
model, which increases to the originality of the study.
However, it has to be noted that the Beldad et al. (2010)
framework does not consider some of the peculiarities of CGM,
which have been highlighted in e-WOM literature and therefore it
has been adapted to ﬁt the current research topic. For instance,
popular CGM like TripAdvisor and Yelp are characterized by reviews posted by anonymous users on travel products and services
such as attractions, accommodation, and restaurants available in a
destination. A factor such as the credibility of the source will be
more important in such a context. Moreover, the propensity to trust
construct does not ﬁt with the current study as this construct can
be important for ﬁrst-time users but irrelevant for returning users,
which are the users we focus on in this study; therefore we have
decided to drop this construct.
To summarize, in this study customer-based antecedents of
trust included factors such as users' experience (knowledge and
skills) in using CGM; website-based antecedents included website
quality, information quality, and perceived source credibility; and
organization/company-based antecedents included users' previous
experiences with CGM. Furthermore, this study attempts to measure
the consequences of trusting behavior towards CGM. Thus, we have
considered whether trust inﬂuences the following consumer behaviors that are critical to the realization of the strategic objectives of
CGM websites: following the recommendations of reviewers
and purchasing the recommended product/service, and spreading
positive word of mouth (WOM) about the CGM website.
3.1. Website-based trust antecedents
3.1.1. Source credibility
Source credibility and trustworthiness are considered to be
fundamental predictors of consumers' acceptance of a message in
traditional WOM (Hovland, Janis, & Kelley, 1953; McGinnies &
Ward, 1980). Different than in face-to-face communications, in eWOM consumers cannot adopt paraverbal cues to assess the
credibility of a communication source (Litvin et al., 2008; Tidwell &
Walther, 2002). Evaluating the credibility of a source is difﬁcult in
e-WOM communications (Park & Lee, 2008) because reviews are
written by anonymous sources who have no prior relationship
with the receiver (Dellarocas, 2003).
Current research on the inﬂuence of source credibility on website
trust is scant in e-WOM. Existing research has explored the inﬂuence
of source credibility on perceived information usefulness (Cheung,
Lee, & Rabjhon, 2008; Willemsen, Neijens, Bronner, & DeRidder,
2011), diagnosticity (Filieri, 2015), and information adoption with
contrasting results (Zhang & Watts, 2008). In the tourism literature,

Ayeh, Au, and Law (2013b) revealed a weak or non-signiﬁcant relationship between source trustworthiness/expertise and intention to
use user-generated content for travel planning.
However, more and more CGM require contributors to create a
web proﬁle when they register where they can provide some personal information (e.g. proﬁle picture, places visited, and the like);
additionally, most of these websites utilise reviewer reputation
systems to enable consumers to assess the credibility of reviewers
(Cheung, Luo, Sia, & Chen, 2009). For example, TripAdvisor has
introduced a badge system that show the different levels of expertise
of reviewers, which can range from ‘reviewer’ to ‘top contributor’
depending on the number of reviews and posts published, while
Yelp's users can acquire the ‘elite’ badge if they frequently provide
high quality reviews and actively engage with the community.
Thus, all of this information may provide some sort of
indication about the potential credibility and trustworthiness of a
source. In this study, we argue that the perceived credibility of
the source (reviewers) inﬂuences consumers' trust towards a
channel of communication, namely a CGM website. We believe
that if travel consumers perceive the reviewers as credible
sources they will believe that the website is reliable in that it has
effective mechanisms in place to avoid spammers who post
deceptive reviews through fake accounts. Therefore, we hypothesize as follows:
H1. Source credibility positively inﬂuences trust towards CGM.

3.1.2. Information quality
Information quality refers to the quality of the information
contained in an online review and is deﬁned as ‘the quality of the
content of a consumer review from the perspective of information
characteristics’ (Park, Lee, & Han, 2007, p. 128). Information quality
in e-WOM reﬂects relevancy, sufﬁciency, accuracy, currency
(Cheung et al., 2008; Park et al., 2007), value (Filieri & McLeay, 2014),
credibility and usefulness (Cheung et al., 2009) of the information.
Information quality has been found to predict information adoption
(Filieri & McLeay, 2014) and purchase intentions (Park et al., 2007)
and it is also a signiﬁcant determinant of user trust in commercial
websites (Kim, Xu, & Koh, 2004), in health infomediaries (Zahedi &
Song, 2008), and an enabler of inter-organizational data interchange
(Nicolaou & McKnight, 2006).
Travel consumers retrieve reviews to make informed decisions
about their travel options; however, the tourism product is complex as it is made up of multiple products and features, such as
accommodation, transportation, restaurants, attractions and the
like, so that consumers need to collect a large amount of information before being able to build their own travel package. Moreover,
every consumer is different and has different needs; young married
couples may be looking for romantic accommodation, while backpackers search for cheap and functional places to stay. A CGM that
wants to satisfy such a wide variety of information needs must be
able to provide information that is relevant to the different needs,
current, and complete. Such information is valued highly if it is not
biased by promotional messages from hotel managers (information
credibility) and instead it is entirely based on real customers' experiences. In fact, the more credible the information is perceived to
be, the more useful it is in making informed decisions (Cheung
et al., 2009). Therefore, if travel consumers ﬁnd that the information from reviews is credible, current, useful, valuable, sufﬁciently
complete and relevant to satisfy their information needs, they will
trust CGM more because they will think it comes from real customers and not from biased information sources. Thus, we propose:
H2. Information quality in reviews positively inﬂuences trust towards CGM.

R. Filieri et al. / Tourism Management 51 (2015) 174e185

Additionally, the quality of information in online reviews is a
very important cue for consumers to assess the credibility of a
source (Filieri, 2015). An information source who provides current,
accurate, complete, useful, and detailed information regarding
the relevant features of a product may be perceived as more
credible than a source who provides a short, superﬁcial, emotional,
and inaccurate description of a product. For this reason, we hypothesize as follows:

177

are empowering travelers as they are now capable of building a
tourism package for themselves (Litvin et al., 2008). Following
this literature, we argue that the more a website is effective in
fulﬁlling consumers' needs and in facilitating them in accomplishing their tasks (e.g. building a tourism package), the higher
will be their satisfaction. Accordingly, we hypothesize:
H3-1. Perceived website quality positively inﬂuences customer
satisfaction.

H2-1. Information quality positively inﬂuences perceived source
credibility.
The quality of the information contained in online reviews
can also be considered as an antecedent of perceived website
quality. If the information retrieved on CGM is judged to be of high
quality that means that the website fulﬁlls consumers' expectations.
The satisfaction that derives from retrieving highly valued content
might be transferred to the functionalities of the website such as
ease of navigation, security and privacy, speed of page loading and
the like. As a consequence, travel consumers may perceive a CGM
website to be of high quality as it enables them to effectively and
efﬁciently retrieve all the information they need to make an
informed decision. For this reason, we hypothesize as follows:
H2-2. Information quality positively inﬂuences perceived website
quality.
Moreover, we argue that information quality predicts customer
satisfaction with CGM. The main reason why consumers visit CGM
is to retrieve travel information from other customers who have
experienced a product or a service. If this information helps the
travel consumer to effectively plan his/her trip and the website
meets customer expectations, then he/she will be satisﬁed and will
decide to return and use the website again in the future. Thus, we
hypothesize as follows:
H2-3. Information
satisfaction.

quality

positively

inﬂuences

customer

3.1.3. Perceived CGM website quality
Website quality refers to ‘customers’ perception of a website's
performance in information retrieval and delivery’ (Yang, Cai, Zhou,
& Zhou, 2005, p.579). In e-commerce literature, ﬁndings support the
inﬂuence that website quality has on the formation of consumer
trust in online merchants (McKnight, Choudhury, & Kacmar, 2002).
However, CGM websites like TripAdvisor do not enable transactions
and so they function as information presenting and communication
websites (Yang et al., 2005). Thus, the website quality of nontransacting websites includes factors such as ease of navigation,
interactive communication and customization, technical adequacy,
privacy, and security (Yang et al., 2005). In online environments, the
website is faceless, so the interface becomes the ‘online storefront’
upon which ﬁrst impressions are formed (McKnight et al., 2002). If a
CGM is perceived as safe and secure, eases consumers' navigation
and the retrieval of information through customized search engines
and has forums where customers can interact with other customers,
the user of such CGM will form a positive impression of the CGM
website, which ultimately will be perceived as reliable. Accordingly,
we hypothesize as follows:
H3. Perceived website quality positively inﬂuences trust towards
CGM.
Previous research in e-tourism reported that website quality
has a direct and positive impact on customer satisfaction
(Bai, Law, & Wen, 2008). By facilitating customer-to-customer information sharing about travel experiences, CGM websites

3.2. Company/organization-based antecedents of trust
3.2.1. Satisfaction from previous experiences
In marketing literature, customer satisfaction is measured as the
general satisfaction of a customer, which is based on all cumulative
experiences with a company, a product or a service, thereby it is not
the satisfaction resulting from a speciﬁc transaction, rather a global
evaluation of the relationship history between the parties (Olsen &
Johnson, 2003). A previous positive transaction with online shopn,
ping determines customers' trust in the company (Casalo, Flavia
n et al., 2006; Pavlou, 2003; Yoon, 2002).
& Guinaliu, 2007; Flavia
Drawing from this literature we expect that users of CGM who are
satisﬁed with their previous usage experiences will be more likely
to trust a CGM. In fact, while planning their travels, users of CGM
search for tips and advice that can help them improve their decision making. If the tips received meet or exceed the traveler's
expectations then he/she will be satisﬁed with his/her information
search experience. For instance, if online reviews from other
travelers help users to discover attractions, accommodation or
restaurants that they would not be able to discover through other
information sources (e.g. travel guides, friends' and professionals'
advice) then they will be satisﬁed or even delighted as they will feel
empowered. On the contrary, if travel reviews are inaccurate,
biased or seemingly fake they will be more likely to let users
down and then generate disappointment. If consumers experience
disappointment then they will tend not to trust the CGM as the
negative experience will provide them with the evidence that the
CGM is not capable or willing to block unreliable and misleading
content from appearing on the website. Consumers who are satisﬁed with their previous experiences will feel more conﬁdent
about the reliability of the recommendations received on the CGM.
Thus, we hypothesize as follows:
H4. Satisfaction with previous experiences positively inﬂuences
users' trust towards a CGM.

3.3. Customer-based trust antecedents
3.3.1. User experience and proﬁciency
The receiver of communications in e-WOM indicates a travel
consumer that seeks advices and recommendations from a CGM.
The level of experience in using CGM and online reviews in the
decision making process can be an important factor to consider
when investigating the antecedents of trust (Beldad et al., 2010).
According to Brown, Borderick, and Lee (2007), lack of experience
may lead to naivety and credibility being given to all information
on the Internet. Some studies support this argument by indicating
that higher levels of web experience are associated with low levels
of trust in online organizations (Aiken & Boush, 2006; Jarvenpaa
et al., 2000). According to Aiken and Boush (2006) a possible
explanation for this is that users with high levels of experience
may have already accumulated sufﬁcient knowledge of possibilities that things could go wrong any time online. According to Bart
et al. (2005) more knowledge of and experience with the Internet

178

R. Filieri et al. / Tourism Management 51 (2015) 174e185

can spur greater conﬁdence in using it, which would inﬂate online
trust. However, other studies have found that high levels of
Internet experience affect consumers' tendency to trust Internet
technology, thereby enhancing their trust in Internet-based
transactions (Corbitt, Thanasankit, & Yi, 2003).
In this study, we argue that a travel consumer who has accumulated experience with using online reviews and CGM may feel
conﬁdent of not being deceived by unreliable websites or content.
An experienced user may feel knowledgeable enough in how to
spot unreliable websites and fake reviews. Instead, ﬁrst-time users
are less knowledgeable about CGM and unaware of how to tell
whether a CGM is reliable or not. Thus, lower levels of expertise
and knowledge in using online CGM may result in more cautious
behavior towards online reviews and CGM. On the contrary, a user
who is very experienced with online reviews will trust CGM
because he/she has got enough knowledge and experience of the
website and of the reviews, which enables him/her to conﬁdently
distinguish reliable from unreliable CGM websites. Thus, we hypothesize as follows:
H5. Customer experience with using CGM positively inﬂuences trust
towards CGM.
3.4. Behavioral consequences of trust towards CGM
The value of a CGM is given by the number of people using it
and by the inﬂuence it has in a speciﬁc industry. To provide an
example, the higher the popularity and inﬂuence of TripAdvisor in
the tourism industry, the more e-retailers in the same industry
would be willing to pay for a sponsored link from this website. Such
a business model sustains the revenues of this and many other
CGM, which is based on selling leads to large e-retailers in the
travel and tourism industry, including Booking.com, Agoda.com,
Hotels.com, and many more. Therefore, two key performance indicators of CGM are customer base and inﬂuence on consumer
decisions. In this study, it is expected that trust towards CGM can
inﬂuence both consumers' intention to adopt the recommendations received and engage in positive WOM about the CGM to other
people. Below the hypotheses of the study are presented.
3.4.1. Recommendation adoption
Information adoption is the process by which people purposefully engage in using information (Cheung et al., 2008;

Sussman & Siegal, 2003). Research highlighted the inﬂuence of
trusting beliefs and trusting intention on the user's intention to
follow an e-retailer's advice (McKnight et al., 2002). In the
context of CGM, a trustworthy website is believed to monitor the
legitimacy of the reviews submitted by its users in the consumer's best interest, thereby decreasing the risks associated
with being deceived by fake content. Thus, we argue that the
users of CGM should consider whether the recommendations
contained in consumer reviews can be relied upon in order to
learn about the expected quality and performance of a product or
service. If the users of a CGM believe that the recommendations
hosted on that CGM are reliable, they will be more likely to adopt
those recommendations in their decision making. On the contrary, if the website is perceived as unreliable, consumers will
not adopt the recommendations as they do not want to risk
being deceived. Therefore, the more consumers view CGM as
trustworthy the more likely they will be to follow the advice
received.
H6. Customer trust towards CGM positively inﬂuences recommendation adoption.

3.4.2. Word of mouth
There is a scarcity of studies in online settings about the role
of trust on consumer's intention to engage in positive WOM. In
this study, we argue that if travel consumers trust CGM, they will
then be more willing to talk to their friends and acquaintances
about the website and about the experiences they have with using
it. In fact, a consumer who uses other consumers' recommendations is more likely to improve his/her decision making. For
instance, through reading consumer reviews the travel consumer
may experience accommodation, restaurants or visit attractions
which are off the beaten track, and these experiences will motivate
him/her to engage in WOM about the tips received from CGM to
their friends. The more consumers are conﬁdent about the trustworthiness of a CGM website the more likely they will be to tell
their friends and acquaintances where the advice came from
because the risk of deception is very low(Fig. 1). For this reason,
we hypothesize:
H7. Consumer trust towards CGM positively inﬂuences word
of mouth.

Fig. 1. Theoretical framework and hypotheses.

R. Filieri et al. / Tourism Management 51 (2015) 174e185

4. Methodology
4.1. Data collection
Structural Equation Modeling (SEM) has been favored as a
measurement technique over simple regression tools, because it
enables researchers to test a series of dependence relationships
simultaneously (Hair, Black, Babin, & Anderson, 2010). The questionnaire for this study was created through a professional onlinebased survey tool, which has already been adopted in tourism
research with satisfactory results (Ayeh et al., 2013a). The web
questionnaire was primarily composed of closed questions that
were measured using a 7-point Likert scale (see Table 2). The
questionnaire was available in English and, prior to administration,
it was pilot-tested with a total of 49 users of CGM, which led to
paraphrasing and deleting items that were ambiguous or too
similar to each other. An email with a link to the questionnaire
was sent to a convenience sample of travel consumers among
academic staff members and students from two universities
located in the Republic of Ireland and in England. The focus on
this European sample was decided in order to widen the
geographical scope of e-WOM research as existing e-WOM studies
are largely based on American and Asian consumers (Chan & Ngai,
2011).
The travel consumers who participated to this study had recent
experience in the use of CGM for tourism-related products and
services (e.g. accommodation, restaurants), which was assessed in
different ways: ﬁrst, the email sent to potential respondents clearly
stated that only people with recent experiences with CGM could
participate in this study; second, the respondents were asked to
write the name of the website where they read consumer reviews
and indicate how frequently they used reviews before purchasing
a travel product/service. A total of 401 responses were received;
however, 35 questionnaires were discarded for different reasons
such as outliers or missing cases, which yielded a total of 366
usable questionnaires.
4.2. Measures
The scale and items that were used to measure the constructs in
this study are displayed in Table 2 and are derived from previous
studies. Source credibility and trustworthiness were measured by a
scale developed by Ohanian (1990) and recently used by Senecal
and Nantel (2004) in e-WOM research. Information quality was
measured through a scale used in previous studies in e-WOM
(Cheung et al., 2009; Filieri & McLeay, 2014; Park et al., 2007). The
scale developed by Yang et al. (2005) for non-transacting websites
was adopted to measure website quality for CGM and excluded the
items measuring adequacy of information and usefulness of content because research has demonstrated that website quality and
information quality are two different factors (DeLone & McLean,
1992). The scale used to measure trust towards CGM was similar
to a scale adopted in previous studies (Jarvenpaa et al., 2000; Kim,
Ferrin, & Rao, 2008). The scale used to measure users' experience
with CGM and CGC was adapted from Smith et al. (2005). Customer
satisfaction was measured with two items derived from Pavlou
(2003), while information adoption was measured by a scale used
in previous studies of online reviews (Cheung et al., 2009). e-WOM
behavior was measured through a scale developed by Brown, Barry,
Dacin, and Gunst (2005).
4.3. Sample proﬁle
The socio-demographic characteristics of the sample are presented in Table 1. The sample was primarily composed of

179

Table 1
Socio-demographic characteristics of the respondents.
Dimension

Items

Percentage

Gender

F
M
18e25
26e35
36e45
46e54
70.000 V and above
50.000e69.000 V
30.000e49.000 V
10.000e29.000 V
Under 9.999 V
No Answer
Rep. of Ireland or UK
Other European countries
United States
Others

46.7
53.3
63.5
33.5
1.5
1.5
0.5
0.5
5.4
35.2
36.6
21.8
92.9
3.6
1.5
2

Age

Income

Nationality

individuals aged 18e35 (97% of the sample) from European countries, primarily from the UK and the Republic of Ireland. This
sample composition may result from the questionnaire being
available in English, which reduced the number of non-English
speaking respondents. The age range can be considered a limitation; however, individuals in this age cohort use consumer reviews
the most and the Internet penetration in these countries is among
the highest in the world (84%), as demonstrated by a recent Nielsen
study (2013).
4.4. Data analysis
The most fundamental assumption in multivariate data
analysis is the normality of the data, which has been tested using
the Kaiser-Meyer-Olkin measure of sampling adequacy which
provided a value of 0.907, indicating that the model is meritorious
(Hair et al., 2010). Normality was also assessed through the skewness and kurtosis values (see Table 3), which did not exceed ±2.58
or ±1.96; thus, the distribution can be considered normal (Hair
et al., 2010).
Both the convergent and discriminant validity of the model
were tested. Convergent validity was assessed using the average
variance extracted (AVE), Cronbach's Alpha, and Composite Reliability (CR). The factor loadings for all the constructs used in this
study were higher than the recommended cut-off of 0.5, with the
exception of website security which was 0.475 and for this reason
this item was removed. CR values (see Table 2) were well above the
threshold of 0.6 (Fornell & Larcker, 1981), thus demonstrating that
the scales measure the concepts that they were designed to measure. Reliability was assessed for each construct with Cronbach's a,
which ranged from 0.815 (website trust) to 0.917 (source credibility), which signiﬁes a very good level of reliability for the items
and the scales that were used in this study (Nunnally, 1978).
Discriminant validity was assessed through the average variance
extracted (AVE) for each latent variable included in the model,
which should be greater than the squared correlation estimate
(Fornell & Larcker, 1981). Table 3 shows that these requirements
have been met. Moreover, all factor correlations were below the
0.85 threshold (Fornell & Larcker, 1981).
The overall model ﬁt was measured using the relative/
normed chi-square (x2/df), yielding a value of x2/df ¼ 1.995, which
is below the recommended threshold of 3 (Kline, 2011), the chisquared value was 961.378 and all factor loadings were statistically signiﬁcant (p ¼ 0.000). The goodness-of-ﬁt index (GFI) was
0.905, and the comparative ﬁt index (CFI) was 0.946; thus, both
were above the suggested cut-off of 0.9 (Hu & Bentler, 1999).

180

R. Filieri et al. / Tourism Management 51 (2015) 174e185

Table 2
Scales, Items, Factor Loadings, Cronbach's a.
Construct

Items

Website Quality
(WEBQUAL)
(7-point, strongly disagreestrongly agree)

This travel review website
1. is easy to use
2 ... has well-organized hyperlinks
3 ... has customized search functions
4 … provided opportunities to interact with other customers
5 … has high speed of page loading
6 … is easily accessible from different media
7 … .guarantees users' privacy
The information in online reviews was
1. Timely
2. Relevant to my needs
3. Complete for my needs
4. Valuable
5. Useful
6. Credible
1. The reviewers were credible
2 … were experienced
3 … were trustworthy
4 … were reliable
1. I am satisﬁed with the information I have received from this travel
reviews website
2. I am satisﬁed with my previous experiences with this website
1. Prior to your participation in this study, how would you rate your
level of experience in terms of using CGM?
2. Prior to your participation in this study, how would you rate your
level of experience in terms of browsing CGM?
3. Prior to your participation in this study, how would you rate your
level of experience in terms of online recommendations?
1. I think that the information offered by this travel reviews website
was sincere and honest
2. I think that the advice and recommendations given on this travel
reviews website are made in search of mutual beneﬁt of both the
reviewer and customers
3. This travel reviews website is trustworthy
1. I mentioned to others that I seek travel information from this
travel reviews website
2. I made sure that others know that I rely on this review website for
travel information
3. I spoke positively about this travel review website to others
4. I recommended this travel review website to close personal
friends
1. Online reviews made it easier for me to make purchase decision
(e.g., purchase or not purchase)
2. Online reviews have enhanced my effectiveness in making
purchase decision
3. Online reviews have motivated me to make a purchase decision
(purchase or not purchase)
4. The last time I read online reviews I adopted consumers'
recommendations
5. Information from review contributed to my knowledge of
discussed product/service

Information Quality
(INFOQUAL)
(7-point, strongly disagreestrongly agree)

Source Credibility (SC)
(7-point, strongly disagreestrongly agree)
Customer Satisfaction (SAT)
(7-point, strongly disagreestrongly agree)
Receiver Experience
(EXP)
(7-point, not experienced at
all - very experienced)

Website Trust (WEBTRUS)
(7-point, strongly disagree
-strongly agree)

Word of Mouth Behavior
(WOM)
(7-point, never-frequently)

Recommendation Adoption
(ADO)
(7-point, strongly disagree
estrongly agree)

Factor loading

CR

Overall a

0.926

0.830

0.902

0.865

0.878

0.917

0.893

0.892

0.903

0.901

0.879

0.815

0.926

0.858

0.898

0.896

0.849
0.727
0.873
0.754
0.807
0.857
0.732
0.807
0.748
0.786
0.778
0.832
0.717
0.862
0.779
0.894
0.886
0.872
0.923
0.913
0.904
0.787
0.857
0.856

0.809
0.871
0.873
0.876
0.859
0.849
0.814
0.801
0.799
0.725

Table 3
Means, SD, correlations, and AVE.
Variable

Mean

SD

Skew

Kurt

1

2

3

4

5

1.SC
2.INFOQUAL
3.WEBQUAL
4.SAT
5.EXP

5.12
5.22
5.34
5.65
4.77

0.9918
0.9248
0.9689
1.0899
1.5338

0.666
0.586
0.688
1.13
0.494

1.079
0.991
0.624
1.800
0.572

0.734
0.496
0.525
0.530
0.290

e
0.607
0.554
0.591
0.301

e
e
0.643
0.604
0.290

e
e
e
0.806
0.415

e
e
e
e
0.757

Note. Off-diagonal values are squared correlations and on-diagonal values are AVEs.
Note. All correlations were signiﬁcant at p < 0.001.

The root mean square error of approximation (RMSEA), which indicates the amount of error in the model, was 0.058 below the
recommended cut-off of 0.06 (Hu & Bentler, 1999; Kline, 2011).
Overall, the structural equation model shows a good ﬁt (see
Table 4).

5. Results
The structural equation model was tested using the statistical
software Amos 18.0, and the results are presented in Table 4. Based
on the results, the strongest predictors of website trust were: information quality (b ¼ 0.402; p < 0.001; t ¼ 4.966); customer

R. Filieri et al. / Tourism Management 51 (2015) 174e185

181

Table 4
Goodness of ﬁt indexes and hypotheses.
Goodness of ﬁt of the
Model

Hypoth.

Relationship

Standard. Regression weight

t value

R2

Supported vs. Rejected

x2/df
GFI
CFI
Chi-sq.
RMSEA

H1
H2
H2-1
H2-2
H2-3
H3
H3-1
H4
H5
H6
H7

SC–> WEBTRUS
INFOQUAL–> WEBTRUS
INFOQUAL–> SC
INFOQUAL–>WEBQUAL
INFOQUAL–> SAT
WEBQUAL–> WEBTRUS
WEBQUAL–>SAT
SAT–> WEBTRUS
EXP–> WEBTRUS
WEBTRUS–> ADO
WEBTRUS–> WOM

0.070
0.402***
0.694***
0.454***
0.402***
0.279***
0.195**
0.381***
0.020
0.630***
0.812***

1.049
4.966
8.087
5.100
5.382
4.036
2.337
6.611
0.576
9.148
10.317

0.832
0.832
0.366
0.548
0.812
0.832
0.812
0.832
0.832
0.397
0.778

Rejected
Supported
Supported
Supported
Supported
Supported
Supported
Supported
Rejected
Supported
Supported

1.995
0.905
0.946
961.378
0.058

Note: *** indicates p < 0.001, ** indicates p < 0.01, * indicates p < 0.1, no star means nonesigniﬁcant.

satisfaction (b ¼ 0.381; p < 0.001; t ¼ 6.611); and website quality
(b ¼ 0.279; p < 0.001; t ¼ 4.036). Contrary to our predictions, source
credibility (b ¼ 0.070, p < non-signiﬁcant; t ¼ 1.049) and receiver
experience (b ¼ 0.020; p < non-signiﬁcant; t ¼ 0.576) did not
exhibit a signiﬁcant predictive power in their relationship with
the dependent variable; thereby the results support hypotheses
H2, H3, and H4, while H1 and H5 are rejected.
Findings also show that information quality is a signiﬁcant and
strong predictor of website quality (b ¼ 0.454; p < 0.001; t ¼ 5.100);
of source credibility (b ¼ 0.694; p < 0.001; t ¼ 8.087); and of
customer satisfaction (b ¼ 0.402; p < 0.001; t ¼ 5.382) together
with website quality (b ¼ 0.195; p < 0.01; t ¼ 2.337).
Finally, the inﬂuence of website trust on respectively recommendation adoption (b ¼ 0.630; p < 0.001; t ¼ 9.148) and word of
mouth (b ¼ 0.812; p < 0.001; t ¼ 10.317) is found to be positive,
strong and highly signiﬁcant; thus, both H6 and H7 are accepted.
6. Discussion
Nowadays, the reliability of recommendations hosted on CGM is
threatened by the rise of fake and promotional content being
posted by paid reviewers or by managers and staff of business organizations to boost sales. Trust is a key performance indicator for
CGM organizations, whose inﬂuence depends on the number of
users and visitors that rely on the recommendations of CGM to
make a decision about the products and service they are planning
on buying.
Distinct from prior e-WOM researchers who focused on the
inﬂuence of reviews on travelers' purchase intentions (e.g.
Vermeulen & Seegers, 2009), and on sales (e.g. Ye et al., 2009), this
study has investigated the antecedents and consequences of trust
towards CGM. The tested model was adapted from Beldad et al.
(2010) and included a number of factors that have not been
tested before in a single model, which advances e-WOM theory.
Thus, the theoretical implications of this research are that consumer trust towards CGM relies on three main antecedents:
1) those related to the quality of the information contained in online reviews; 2) those related to the quality of the website that hosts
the recommendations; 3) those related to the level of customer
satisfaction with previous experiences. It appears that the higher
the quality of the information that consumers retrieve the more
they will perceive the website to be of high quality, which will both
lead to customer satisfaction and trust in the CGM website. The
results have also proved that trust affects two types of consumer
behavior: recommendation adoption and word of mouth.
This study's ﬁndings emphasize the centrality of information
quality in CGM, which was found to be the most important antecedent of trust towards CGM, which accords with ﬁndings from

previous research but in different contexts (Nicolaou & McKnight,
2006; Zahedi & Song, 2008). This result can be explained by the
fact that consumers use CGM to obtain a type of information that
is highly valuable and difﬁcult to ﬁnd in other media, namely reviews from previous customers who, by describing their previous
experiences, help other consumers to assess the quality of the
products and services they are planning to buy. If the information
hosted on CGM ﬁts consumer needs, is credible, current, complete,
valuable and useful, consumers will rely on the recommendations
provided on CGM. Therefore, the main reason consumers trust
CGM is due to the quality of the recommendations that they
receive, meaning that CGM offering high quality information are
still perceived as trustworthy information channels. Consumers
trust CGM as these websites give them the opportunity to read
reviews from real customers, which is different than reading promotional content on corporate websites.
Information quality was also found to be a strong predictor of
source credibility, website quality, and customer satisfaction.
Interestingly, it is the quality of the information from online reviews that will provide consumers with an indication of the level
of reliability of a source, which means that in the absence of verbal
and paraverbal cues users of CGM will adopt information quality
criteria related to the message of the review as a cue to assess the
credibility of a source. This ﬁnding may be explained by the fact
that users rarely check the proﬁle information of reviewers, rather
they prefer to process the relevant information from reviews
that are likely to satisfy their need to assess the credibility of
a source.
Additionally, users of CGM will use information quality cues to
infer the quality of CGM websites. This ﬁnding may be due to the
fact that the primary function of a CGM website is to provide
customer accounts of their experience with products and services
in the form of reviews, discussions, comments, ratings, and rankings. Thereby the higher the quality of the content hosted on CGM,
the better consumer perception will be of the overall quality of
the website.
Moreover, the quality of advice received is also the main
reason why consumers are satisﬁed with their previous experiences with a CGM website. This result can be explained by the
fact that travelers will feel empowered by using online customer
reviews to inform their travel decisions, which will result in
better travel experiences and consequently higher levels of
satisfaction.
Our ﬁndings also show that satisfaction with previous experiences strongly predicts website trust, which agrees with previous
n
ﬁndings in e-commerce research (e.g. Casalo et al., 2007; Flavia
et al., 2006; Pavlou, 2003; Yoon, 2002). Satisfaction with previous
experiences leads to trust towards CGM. The satisfaction of

182

R. Filieri et al. / Tourism Management 51 (2015) 174e185

customers derives from receiving valuable, useful, and complete
assessments from previous customers about the products and
services that they are planning to buy. Although the mass media
have repeatedly put in the pillory the incapability of review
websites to tackle the phenomenon of fake reviews, customers are
in general satisﬁed with their experiences with CGM and trust
them. Thus, if the quality of information is kept high on CGM,
consumers will be satisﬁed and they will continue trusting CGM
websites.
Website quality emerged as a strong predictor of website trust
and of customer satisfaction. Thus, the higher the perceived quality
of a CGM website in terms of its capability to enable (also through
customized search functions) consumers easy and rapid access to
the information they are looking for from different devices (e.g.
smartphone), to interact with other consumers, to guarantee their
privacy, the more consumers will trust and will be satisﬁed with
CGM. Thus, this study shows that website quality is an important
predictor of trust and customer satisfaction not only for e-commerce websites (e.g. Bai et al., 2008; McKnight et al., 2002), but also
for CGM websites.
Research on source credibility in e-WOM has mostly focused
on its inﬂuence on consumer decisions (Zhang & Watts, 2008),
consumer intentions to use user-generated content (Ayeh et al.,
2013b), and information diagnosticity (Filieri, 2015). This study
has instead measured the relationship between source credibility
and trust towards a type of online media, namely CGM. Findings
show that source credibility does not exercise a strong inﬂuence on
the reliability of CGM. This result may be due to the fact that consumers may be aware that fake proﬁles can be created easily on
CGM websites (Dellarocas, 2003) and that not all the sources that
publish reviews can be considered as credible and trustworthy;
however, they are conﬁdent that the wisdom of the crowd will
emerge and that a few fake proﬁles or low quality reviews cannot
skew the overall positive evaluation that customers have of CGM
websites.
It was found that the level of experience of the receiver in terms
of browsing and using CGM was not a signiﬁcant predictor of trust
towards CGM. This means that trust evaluations of CGM will be
almost the same between experienced and inexperienced users.
However, on average, users with more experience with CGM will
tend to trust CGM less than novice users.
Results have proved that trust predicts information adoption in
CGM websites and word of mouth, which advances e-WOM literature as previous research found that information usefulness and
credibility both predicted information adoption (Cheung et al.,
2008; 2009). This result means that the higher the quality of recommendations and the more a CGM is perceived as trustworthy,
the higher will be its inﬂuence on consumers' purchasing decisions.
Thus, the element that will distinguish how inﬂuential CGM are
will be the level of trustworthiness ascribed to them by users.
Simply put, trust is a critical performance indicator for CGM and
must be constantly monitored.
Finally, the more consumers perceive a CGM to be trustworthy
the more they are willing to talk to their friends about it. Therefore,
if CGM websites want to increase their popularity among customers, they have to be trusted, as trust will motivate its users to
talk to their friends about their positive experience with the
recommendation received from the CGM website. This way, these
organizations will save a huge amount of money on advertising
as their consumers will informally publicize the website in their
social circles, and following a network effect, the name of the
website will spread quickly among Internet users. Therefore,
keeping high levels of trust can be critical also to enlarge the
customer base and increase the popularity and reach of a CGM
website.

7. Managerial implications
Trust has become a top concern for CGM as evidenced by a pop-up
message on Yelp: ‘Your trust is our top concern, so businesses can't
pay to alter or remove their reviews'. Failure on the part of these
organizations to maintain high levels of trust among their users could
signiﬁcantly thwart users from engaging in information search from
CGM, which can then undermine the inﬂuential power that they have
in a speciﬁc industry. This study has provided empirical validation of
a model that can help managers of these organizations to understand
the drivers and consequences of trust to their CGM website. Information quality emerged as a critical success factor for CGM, thus
managers of these organizations should put a stronger focus on this
aspect because by increasing the quality of the information provided
by their users they can improve customer satisfaction, website
quality and website trustworthiness perceptions, which could boost
their popularity and increase their inﬂuence in the industry.
Keeping the quality of information provided by reviewers high
is a major challenge for CGM as publishing fake reviews by posing as
a customer is relatively easy and the tendency to pay for promotional reviews is expected to grow in the future (Gartner, 2012). The
growth of fake reviews might affect the quality of the information
hosted by CGM as consumers will have to ﬁgure out how to identify
credible and discard potentially fake reviews. Considering the
proven importance of the level of quality of the information hosted
on CGM, the tendency to bias reviews and ratings may have a
negative impact on the level of trust towards CGM, and as a
consequence on their inﬂuence on consumer decisions and on word
of mouth. Thus, we recommend that CGM should foster the development of sophisticated software or algorithms that can help them
to promptly detect promotional or fake reviews. Websites like TripAdvisor will need to be signiﬁcantly more vigilant in their quest to
ensure that all reviews and ratings are genuine and trustworthy.
Another recommendation for CGM to keep high levels of
trust would be to ask reviewers to post a picture of their receipt or
any other evidence of their purchase in order to communicate
reliability. Additionally, the most active members of a CGM community could be engaged to constantly monitor the quality of the
entries. In fact, some of these users (e.g. Destination experts in
TripAdvisor) are so committed to CGM that they may be willing to
spend even more time to help the website to keep out the shills
from business owners, their friends, and employees.
8. Limitations and future research
The present study has some limitations. First, the sample
was primarily composed of respondents from the UK and Republic of
Ireland. Although our ﬁndings may generally apply to similar cultural
contexts, results may not be generalizable to other geographical
areas. For instance, differences in cultural background may affect the
antecedents of trust towards websites (Doney, Cannon, & Mullen,
1998; Jarvenpaa, Tractinsky, & Saarinen, 1999). Moreover, the size
of the sample was relatively small. Therefore, future research should
replicate the study in other contexts and with a larger sample size.
This study was focused on actual users of CGM; however, scholars
have investigated the role of trust by identifying different stages: an
‘exploratory stage’ in which a consumer has no direct experience
with an electronic vendor, and a ‘commitment stage’ in which the
consumer has accumulated some experience and decide to carry out
higher risk operations (McKnight, Choudhury, & Kacmar, 2000). This
study has focused on the commitment stage; however, future
research could be undertaken on ﬁrst-time users of CGM and could
investigate the inﬂuence of factors like the propensity to trust, trust
marks, and website reputation which are deemed to be important in
the exploratory stage (Beldad et al., 2010).

R. Filieri et al. / Tourism Management 51 (2015) 174e185

Moreover, the present study suffers the typical limitations of
cross-sectional studies based on SEM. Cross-sectional data require
the assumption of equilibrium and provide only a ‘snapshot’ of an
ongoing dynamic process (Kaplan, Harik, & Hotchkiss, 2001). A
longitudinal approach in the analysis of trust towards CGM is recommended to verify and extend the ﬁndings of this research. Data
collected at different points in time would enable a test of the
predictive validity of the model (between antecedents and trust, or
between trust and outcome measures). A longitudinal study would
be useful to measure stability versus change in rank order and to
understand how trust in CGM evolves over time.
It is important to note that our research model examined
perceived website trust and its inﬂuence on intention behavior (e.g.
recommendation adoption and WOM) rather than actual behavior.
Therefore future research should measure the behavioral outcomes
of trust. In order to do so, scholars could carry out experiments
where respondents are divided into separate groups and are
instructed to browse different CGM before purchasing tourismrelated products and services. Since trust may develop differently
in different kinds of CGM such as blogs, microblogging websites,
and social network websites, experiments could also enable a test
for consumer perception of trust towards different CGM.
This study has measured the inﬂuence of information quality
on trust towards CGM. Information quality was measured as a

composite construct including information value, completeness,
timeliness, usefulness, relevancy, credibility. However, scholars could
explore the inﬂuence of the different dimensions of information
quality on website trust to see which dimension matters the most.
Contribution
Dr.Raffaele Filieri was the main contributor to the full production of this article which draws upon research undertaken in a joint
research project with Salma Alguezaui and Professor Fraser McLeay.
Kindly note Salma Alguezaui is a PhD student at Universita del
Salento Departimento di Igegneria dell' Innovazione,Italy,and a
Research Assistant at Northumbria University.
Acknowledgments
I'd like to thank the editor and three reviewers for their
constructive and helpful comments, prof. Fraser McLeay for his
comments on the questionnaire, and Nigel Coates for his helpful
comments on some sections of the paper.
Appendix 1

Scale

Item

Website Quality (WEBQUAL)
(7-point, strongly disagreestrongly agree)

This travel review website is
1. easy to use
2 … well-organized hyperlinks
3 … customized search functions
4 … provided opportunities to interact with other customers
5 … high speed of page loading
6 … is easily accessible from different media
7 … .guarantees users' privacy
8 … .is secure*
The information in online reviews was
1. Timely
2. Relevant to my needs
3. Complete for my needs
4. Valuable
5. Useful
6. Credible
1. The reviewers were credible
2 … were experienced
3 … were trustworthy
4 … were reliable
1. I am satisﬁed with the information I have received from this travel reviews website
2. I am satisﬁed with my previous experiences with this website

Information Quality
(INFOQUAL)
(7-point, strongly disagreestrongly agree)

Source Credibility (SC)
(7-point, strongly disagreestrongly agree)
Customer Satisfaction (SAT)
(7-point, strongly disagreestrongly agree)
Receiver Experience
(EXP)
(7-point, not experienced at all
- very experienced)

Website Trust (WEBTRUS)
(7-point, strongly disagree
-strongly agree)
Word of Mouth Behavior
(WOM)
(7-point, never-frequently)
Recommendation Adoption
(ADO)
(7-point, strongly disagree
estrongly agree)

*This item was removed from the analysis.

183

1. Prior to your participation in this study, how would you rate your level of experience in
terms of using CGM?
2. Prior to your participation in this study, how would you rate your level of experience in
terms of browsing CGM
3. Prior to your participation in this study, how would you rate your level of experience in
terms of online recommendations?
1. I think that the information offered by this travel reviews website was sincere and honest
2. I think that the advice and recommendations given on this travel reviews website are
made in search of mutual beneﬁt of both the reviewer and customers
3. This travel reviews website is trustworthy
1. I mentioned to others that I seek travel information from this travel reviews website
2. I made sure that others know that I rely on this review website for travel information
3. I spoke positively about this travel review website to others
4. I recommended this travel review website to close personal friends
1. Online reviews made it easier for me to make purchase decision (e.g., purchase or not
purchase)
2. Online reviews have enhanced my effectiveness in making purchase decision
3 … have motivated me to make a purchase decision (purchase or not purchase)
4. The last time I read online reviews I adopted consumers' recommendations
5. Information from review contributed to my knowledge of discussed product/service

Mean

SD

5.6
5.0
5.6
4.9
5.4
5.9
5.0
4.3

1.18
1.36
1.34
1.69
1.34
1.17
1.45
1.72

5.0
5.5
5.0
5.5
5.1
5.2
5.2
5.1
5.0
5.1
5.7
5.6

1.25
1.13
1.29
1.21
1.37
1.24
1.13
1.21
1.18
1.16
1.25
1.17

4.7

1.65

4.7

1.70

4.9

1.67

5.5
5.5

1.16
1.20

5.4
5.7
5.6
5.5
5.9
5.9

1.19
1.28
1.25
1.44
1.23
1.28

5.8
5.7
5.4
5.7

1.15
1.29
1.29
1.19

184

R. Filieri et al. / Tourism Management 51 (2015) 174e185

References
Aiken, K. D., & Boush, D. M. (2006). Trustmarks, objective-source ratings, and
implied investments in advertising: investigating online trust and the contextspeciﬁc nature of internet signals. Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science,
34(3), 308e323.
Arsal, I., Backman, S., & Baldwin, E. (2008). Inﬂuence of an online travel community
€pken, & U. Gretzel (Eds.), Information
on travel decisions. In P. O'Connor, W. Ho
and communication technologies in tourism 2008 (pp. 82e93). Vienna, Austria:
Springer-Verlag.
Ayeh, J. K., Au, N., & Law, R. (2013a). Predicting the intention to use consumergenerated media for travel planning. Tourism Management, 35(April), 132e143.
Ayeh, J. K., Au, N., & Law, R. (2013b). Do we believe in TripAdvisor? Examining
credibility perceptions and online travelers' attitude toward using usergenerated content. Journal of Travel Research, 52(4), 437e452.
Bai, B., Law, R., & Wen, I. (2008). The impact of website quality on customer
satisfaction and purchase intentions: evidence from Chinese online visitors.
International Journal of Hospitality Management, 27(3), 391e402.
Bart, Y., Shankar, V., Sultan, F., & Urban, G. L. (2005). Are the drivers and role of
online trust the same for all web sites and consumers? A large-scale exploratory empirical study. Journal of Marketing, 69(4), 133e152.
Beldad, A., de Jong, M., & Steehouder, M. (2010). How shall I trust the faceless and
the intangible? A literature review on the antecedents of online trust. Computers in Human Behavior, 26(5), 857e868.
Brown, T. J., Barry, T. E., Dacin, P. A., & Gunst, R. F. (2005). Spreading the word:
investigating antecedents of consumers' positive word of mouth intentions and
behaviors in a retailing context. Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science,
33(2), 123e138.
Brown, J., Broderick, A. J., & Lee, N. (2007). Word of mouth communication within
online communities: conceptualizing the online social network. Journal of
Interactive Marketing, 21(3), 2e20.
Buhalis, D., & Law, R. (2008). Progress in information technology and tourism
management: 20 years on and 10 years after the internetdThe state of
eTourism research. Tourism Management, 29(4), 609e623.
Casalo, L. V., Flavi
an, C., & Guinaliu, M. (2007). The inﬂuence of satisfaction,
perceived reputation and trust on a consumer's commitment to a website.
Journal of Marketing Communications, 13(1), 1e17.
Chan, Y. Y. Y., & Ngai, E. W. T. (2011). Conceptualising electronic word of mouth
activity: an input-process-output perspective. Marketing Intelligence & Planning,
29(5), 488e516.
Cheung, C. M. K., Lee, M. K. O., & Rabjhon, N. (2008). The impact of electronic wordof-mouth: the adoption of online opinions in online customer communities.
Internet Research, 18(3), 229e247.
Cheung, M. Y., Luo, C., Sia, C. L., & Chen, H. (2009). Credibility of electronic word-ofmouth: informational and normative determinants of on-line consumer recommendations. International Journal of Electronic Commerce, 13(4), 9e38.
Corbitt, B. J., Thanasankit, T., & Yi, H. (2003). Trust and e-commerce: a study of
consumer perceptions. Electronic Commerce Research and Applications, 2(3),
203e215.
Cui, G., Lui, H.-K., & Guo, X. (2012). The effect of online consumer reviews on new
product sales. International Journal of Electronic Commerce, 17(1), 39e58.
Dellarocas, C. (2003). The digitization of word of mouth: promise and challenges of
online feedback mechanisms. Management Science, 49(10), 1407e1424.
Dellarocas, C., Zhang, X. M., & Awad, N. F. (2007). Exploring the value of online
product reviews in forecasting sales: the case of motion pictures. Journal of
Interactive Marketing, 21(4), 23e45.
DeLone, W. H., & McLean, E. R. (1992). Information systems success: the quest for
the dependent variable. Information Systems Research, 3(1), 60e95.
Dickinger, A. (2011). The trustworthiness of online channels for experience- and
goal-directed search tasks. Journal of Travel Research, 50(4), 378e391.
Doney, P. M., Cannon, J. P., & Mullen, M. R. (1998). Understanding the inﬂuence of
national culture on the development of trust. Academy of Management Review,
23(3), 601e620.
Filieri, R. (2015). What makes online reviews helpful? A diagnosticity-adoption
framework to explain informational and normative inﬂuences in e-WOM.
Journal of Business Research, 68(6), 1261e1270.
Filieri, R., & McLeay, F. (2014). E-WOM and accommodation: an analysis of the
factors that inﬂuence travelers' adoption of information from online reviews.
Journal of Travel Research, 53(1), 44e57.
n, C., Guinalíu, M., & Gurrea, R. (2006). The role played by perceived usability,
Flavia
satisfaction and consumer trust on website loyalty. Information & Management,
43(1), 1e14.
Fornell, C., & Larcker, D. F. (1981). Evaluating structural equation models with unobserved variables and measurement error. Journal of Marketing Research, 18(1),
39e50.
Fotis, J., Buhalis, D., & Rossides, N. (2012). Social media use and impact during the
holiday travel planning process. In M. Fuchs, F. Ricci, & L. Cantoni (Eds.), Information and communication technologies in tourism 2012 (pp. 13e24). Vienna,
Austria: Springer-Verlag.
Gartner. (2012, September 17). Gartner says by 2014, 10e15 percent of social media
reviews to be promotional, paid for by companies [Press release]. Retrieved from
http://www.gartner.com/newsroom/id/2161315.
Godes, D., & Mayzlin, D. (2004). Using online conversations to study word of mouth
communication. Marketing Science, 23(4), 545e560.

Gretzel, U., & Yoo, K. H. (2008). Use and impact of online travel reviews. In
P. O'Connor, W. Hopken, & U. Gretzel (Eds.), Information and communication
technologies in tourism 2008 (pp. 35e46). Vienna, Austria: Springer-Verlag.
Gretzel, U., Yoo, K. H., & Purifoy, M. (2007). Online travel review study: Role and
impact of online travel reviews. Austin, TX: Laboratory for Intelligent Systems in
Tourism, Texas A&M University.
Hair, J. F., Black, W. C., Babin, B. J., & Anderson, R. E. (2010). Multivariate data analysis
(7th ed.). Upper Saddle River, New Jersey: Prentice Hall.
Hennig-Thurau, T., Gwinner, K. P., Walsh, G., & Gremler, D. D. (2004). Electronic
word of mouth via consumer-opinion platforms: what motivates consumers to
articulate themselves on the internet? Journal of Interactive Marketing, 18(1),
38e52.
Hoffman, L. D., Novak, T. P., & Peralta, M. (1999). Building consumer trust online.
Communications of the ACM, 42(4), 80e85.
Hovland, C. I., Janis, I. L., & Kelley, H. H. (1953). Communication and persuasion;
psychological studies of opinion change. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Hu, L. T., & Bentler, P. M. (1999). Cutoff criteria for ﬁt indexes in covariance structure
analysis: conventional criteria versus new alternatives. Structural Equation
Model: A Multidisciplinary Journal, 6(1), 1e55.
Inversini, A., Cantoni, L., & Buhalis, D. (2009). Destinations' information competition
and web reputation. Information Technology & Tourism, 11(3), 221e234.
Jarvenpaa, S. L., Tractinsky, N., & Saarinen, L. (1999). Consumer trust in an internet
store: a cross-cultural validation. Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication,
5(2).
Jarvenpaa, S. L., Tractinsky, N., & Vitale, M. (2000). Consumer trust in an internet
store. Information Technology and Management, 1(1/2), 45e72.
Jindal, N., & Liu, B. (2008). Opinion spam and analysis. February 11-12. In Proceedings of the Conference on Web Search and Web Data Mining (WSDM’08) (pp.
219e230). Palo Alto: California, USA.
Kaplan, D., Harik, P., & Hotchkiss, L. (2001). Cross-sectional estimation of dynamic
structural equation models in disequilibrium. In R. Cudeck, S. du Toit, &
€rbom (Eds.), Structural equation modeling: Present and future (pp. 315e340).
S. So
Lincolnwood, IL: Scientiﬁc Software International.
Kim, D. J., Ferrin, D. L., & Rao, H. R. (2008). A trust-based consumer decision-making
model in electronic commerce: the role of trust, perceived risk, and their antecedents. Decision Support Systems, 44(2), 544e564.
Kim, H., Xu, Y., & Koh, J. A. (2004). A comparison of online trust building factors
between potential customers and repeat customers. Journal of the Association
for Information Systems, 5(10), 392e420.
Kline, R. B. (2011). Principles and practice of structural equation modeling. New York,
NY: Guilford press.
Lee, M. K., & Turban, E. (2001). A trust model for consumer internet shopping. International Journal of Electronic Commerce, 6(1), 75e91.
Litvin, S., Goldsmith, R., & Pan, B. (2008). Electronic word of mouth in hospitality
and tourism management. Tourism Management, 29(3), 458e468.
McGinnies, E., & Ward, C. D. (1980). Better liked than right: trustworthiness and
expertise as factors in credibility. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 6(3),
467e472.
McKnight, D. H., Choudhury, V., & Kacmar, C. (2000). Trust in e-commerce vendors:
a two-stage model. In Proceedings of the 21st International Conference on Information Systems (pp. 532e536). Brisbane, Australia: Association for Information
Systems.
McKnight, D. H., Choudhury, V., & Kacmar, C. (2002). The impact of initial consumer
trust on intentions to transact with a web site: a trust building model. Journal of
Strategic Information Systems, 11(3e4), 297e323.
Morgan, R. M., & Hunt, S. D. (1994). The commitment-trust theory of relationship
marketing. Journal of Marketing, 58(3), 20e38.
Nicolaou, A. I., & McKnight, D. H. (2006). Perceived information quality in data
exchanges: effects on risk, trust, and intention to use. Information Systems
Research, 17(4), 332e351.
Nielsen. (2013, June 27). The reviews are in: yelp users are four-star consumers.
Retrieved
from
http://www.nielsen.com/us/en/insights/news/2013/thereviews-are-ineyelp-users-are-four-star-consumers.html.
Nunnally, J. C. (1978). Psychometric theory (2nd ed.). New York, NY: McGraw-Hill.
Ohanian, R. (1990). Construction and validation of a scale to measure celebrity
endorsers' perceived expertise, trustworthiness, and attractiveness. Journal of
Advertising, 19(3), 39e52.
Olsen, L. L., & Johnson, M. D. (2003). Service equity, satisfaction, and loyalty: from
transaction-speciﬁc to cumulative evaluations. Journal of Service Research, 5(3),
184e195.
Park, D.-H., & Lee, J. (2008). E-WOM overload and its effect on consumer behavioural intention depending on consumer involvement. Electronic Commerce
Research and Applications, 7(4), 386e398.
Park, D.-H., Lee, J., & Han, I. (2007). The effect of online consumer reviews on
consumer purchasing intention: the moderating role of involvement. International Journal of Electronic Commerce, 11(4), 125e148.
Pavlou, P. A. (2003). Consumer acceptance of electronic commerce: integrating trust
and risk with the technology acceptance model. International Journal of Electronic Commerce, 7(3), 101e134.
Senecal, S., & Nantel, J. (2004). The inﬂuence of online product recommendations on
consumers' online choices. Journal of Retailing, 80(2), 159e169.
Smith, O. (2013, July 25). TripAdvisor fails to spot fake restaurant. The Telegraph.
Retrieved from http://www.telegraph.co.uk/travel/travelnews/10201754/Trip
Advisor-fails-to-spot-fake-restaurant.html.

R. Filieri et al. / Tourism Management 51 (2015) 174e185
Smith, D., Menon, S., & Sivakumar, K. (2005). Online peer and editorial recommendations, trust and choice in virtual markets. Journal of Interactive Marketing,
19(3), 15e37.
Sparks, B. A., & Browning, V. (2011). The impact of online reviews on hotel
booking intentions and perception of trust. Tourism Management, 32(6),
1310e1323.
Sparks, B. A., Perkins, H. E., & Buckley, R. (2013). Online travel reviews as persuasive
communication: the effects of content type, source, and certiﬁcation logos on
consumer behavior. Tourism Management, 39(December 2013), 1e9.
Streitﬁeld, D. (2011, August 16). In a race to out-rave, 5-star web reviews go for $5.
The New York Times. Retrieved from http://www.nytimes.com/2011/08/20/
technology/ﬁnding-fake-reviews-online.html?_r¼0.
Sussman, S. W., & Siegal, W. S. (2003). Informational inﬂuence in organizations: an
integrated approach to knowledge adoption. Information Systems Research,
14(1), 47e65.
Tidwell, L. C., & Walther, J. B. (2002). Computer-mediated communication
effects on disclosure, impressions, and interpersonal evaluations: getting to
know one another a bit at a time. Human Communication Research, 28(3),
317e348.
Trend, N. (2013, October 23). TripAdvisor and the issue of trust. The Telegraph.
Retrieved from http://www.telegraph.co.uk/travel/travelnews/10399563/Trip
Advisor-and-the-issue-of-trust.html.
Tuttle, B. (2012, August 28). Why you shouldn't trust positive online reviewsdor
negative ones, for that matter. Time. Retrieved from http://business.time.com/
2012/08/28/why-you-shouldnt-trust-positive-online-reviews-or-negative-onesfor-that-matter/.
Vermeulen, I. E., & Seegers, D. (2009). Tried and tested: the impact of online hotel
reviews on consumer consideration. Tourism Management, 30(1), 123e127.
Willemsen, L. M., Neijens, P. C., Bronner, F., & De Ridder, J. A. (2011). Highly
recommended! The content characteristics and perceived usefulness of
online consumer reviews. Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication, 17(1),
19e38.
Yang, Z., Cai, S., Zhou, Z., & Zhou, N. (2005). Development and validation of an instrument to measure user perceived service quality of information presenting
web portals. Information & Management, 42(4), 575e589.

185

Ye, Q., Law, R., & Gu, B. (2009). The impact of online user reviews on hotel room
sales. International Journal of Hospitality Management, 28(1), 180e182.
Yoo, K.-H., & Gretzel, U. (2009). Comparison of deceptive and truthful travel re€ pken, U. Gretzel, & R. Law (Eds.), Information and communication
views. In W. Ho
technologies in tourism 2009 (pp. 37e48). Vienna, Austria: Springer-Verlag.
Yoon, S.-J. (2002). The antecedents and consequences of trust in online-purchase
decisions. Journal of Interactive Marketing, 16(2), 47e63.
Zahedi, F., & Song, J. (2008). Dynamics of trust revision: using health infomediaries.
Journal of Management Information Systems, 24(4), 225e248.
Zhang, W., & Watts, S. A. (2008). Capitalizing on content: information adoption in
two online communities. Journal of the Association for Information Systems, 9(2),
73e94.
Zhu, F., & Zhang, X. (2010). Impact of online consumer reviews on sales: the
moderating role of product and consumer characteristics. Journal of Marketing,
74(2), 133e148.

Dr. Raffaele Filieri is a Senior Lecturer in the Marketing,
Travel and Tourism Subject Group at Newcastle Business
School, Northumbria University, United Kingdom. He
received his Ph.D. from Universita' Roma Tre and his postdoc from La Sapienza Universita' di Roma. His main
research interests revolve around electronic word of
mouth, online trust, e-tourism, and tourism marketing,
and online consumer cocreation. His papers have been
accepted for publication in Journal of Travel Research,
Journal of Business Research, Industrial Marketing Management, Journal of Knowledge Management, Expert systems, International Journal of Quality & Reliability
Management, Journal of Business Strategy, Marketing
Intelligence & Planning, International Journal of Agile
Systems and Management, Journal of Direct, Data and Digital Marketing Practice.

