Article

Content, context and
co-creation: Digital challenges
in destination branding with
references to Portugal as
a tourist destination

Journal of Vacation Marketing
1–22
ª The Author(s) 2014
Reprints and permission:
sagepub.co.uk/journalsPermissions.nav
DOI: 10.1177/1356766714544235
jvm.sagepub.com

Eduardo Oliveira
University of Groningen, The Netherlands

Emese Panyik
Catholic University of Portugal, Portugal

Abstract
Content generated by tourists, travellers, professional travel bloggers and travel journalists who post,
comment and share information on social media channels is arguably the greatest digital challenge of
destination branding today. The tourist-/traveller-generated content is likely to generate brand value
if integrated into the destination branding strategy. There is, however, a lack of theoretical awareness
and empirical research into the role of social media content in shaping destination brands. By taking
Portugal as a case study, this exploratory research is aimed to show how content analysis can be used
to identify and understand the way tourists and travellers perceive the country as a tourist destination.
The application of this methodology on online material could contribute to a refined destination branding initiative for Portugal by integrating user-generated and travel experts content into the strategy. It
applies textual content analysis by using qualitative data analysis software (i.e. ATLAS.ti 7.0), within an
interpretative paradigm, on tourism-oriented online publications in which the tourism potential of Portugal has been discussed. The findings highlight the tourist/traveller as an opinion maker with access to
a plethora of information communication technologies to act as co-creators of brands. Therefore, it is
wise to engage them and strategically integrate the content they generate into the whole destination
branding effort.
Keywords
Co-creation, content analysis, destination branding, digital challenge, Portugal, tourism

Introduction
Technological advances and the rise of the empowered tourist/traveller suggest that in the future the
most successful destinations will be those that
abandon the traditional top-down approach in
favour of bottom-up and co-created branding strategies. Therefore, a simple tourist or traveller is an
active creator of the destination brand. According
to Moutinho et al. (2013), the advancement of
technology can without doubt be viewed as a
threat for tourist destinations and their branding

process. Developments on the Internet and social
media have allowed the acquisition of immeasurable amounts of information, from landscape
descriptions to pricing, accommodation rating
and also scandals with influence on the image
of destinations (Moutinho et al., 2013). It is

Corresponding author:
Eduardo Oliveira, Faculty of Spatial Sciences, University of
Groningen, Landleven 1, Groningen, 9747AD, The Netherlands.
Email: e.h.da.silva.oliveira@rug.nl

Downloaded from jvm.sagepub.com at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on March 6, 2016

2

Journal of Vacation Marketing
widely accepted that digital destination branding
has become more complex and challenging
(Munro and Richards, 2011). At this point, it is
important to differentiate between a traveller and
a tourist. According to the World Tourism Organization, a traveller is someone who moves
between different geographic locations, for any
purpose and any duration. A visitor is a particular
type of traveller and consequently tourism is a
subset of travel. A tourist is classified as a tourist
(or overnight visitor) if his/her trip includes an
overnight stay in a particular place.
Travellers and tourists, of all ages, increasingly use digital technologies to research,
explore, interact, plan, book and ultimately share
their travel experiences. There is an extensive
array of online channels available to use for this
purpose (e.g. blogs, weblogs, virtual communities and social networking sites). These channels, together with the shift towards traveller
empowerment, are demanding new strategies in
destination branding initiatives. According to
Pan et al. (2007), the impact of word of mouth
on tourists’/travellers’ decision-making process
is uncertain and needs to be investigated through
new methods. In addition, digital communities
and the traveller-generated contents are creating
great opportunities to unobtrusively obtain data
to investigate the realm of tourists’/travellers’
experiences and sentiments (Volo, 2010).
Those who interact with tourist destinations,
they stay overnight (tourists) or not (visitors and
travellers), have the possibility to quickly generate content regarding their travel and vacation
experiences and spread it in the blink of an eye.
A destination brand conveyed by a destination
marketing organization (DMO) is likely to engage
in a two-way conversation. Likewise, networked
platforms have changed the interface between
destinations, their brands and visitors. In fact, it
is no longer the traditional vacation marketing
mix that dictates the promotion rules; it is now the
tourist consumer and the traveller who control the
content, influence the context and determine what
is communicated about a particular destination
(Yeoman and McMahon-Beatie, 2011). The traveller has taken the driving seat in brand identity
(Green, 2007). Given these facts, DMOs, such as
Visit Portugal, would achieve better results (e.g.
increase the number of visitors and tourist revenues) by using coherent strategies to engage with
(potential) visitors through the multiple online
channels available. In addition, the Internet and
social media platforms are the optimal platforms
to spread a narrative, a story and a message. The

common citizen that becomes tourist/traveller
for a period of time and then becomes non-professional/professional travel bloggers and travel
journalists who are no longer mere information
seekers but co-creators of information, generating opportunities for them to conveniently share
content despite being separated by sociocultural
differences and geographical distances (Volo,
2010). Among a range of social media platforms, travel blogs are becoming a more important mechanism for exchanging information
among tourists and for destinations and businesses to learn about the attitudes of their markets (Wenger, 2007). Accessing these freely
written libraries of content, therefore, represents
an occasion for strategic tourism planners to look
at the tourist/traveller in his/her natural mental
environment and to explore their experiences.
In today’s competitive environment, in which
visitors can only be attracted by unique attractions (Eriksson, 2013), it is a challenge to
improve destination’s features, attributes and
unique elements to become attractive places to
visit (Alvarez, 2012). Innovation, decentralization, engagement, involvement and having a
unique voice are the keywords for successful
destination branding. In addition, destination
brands to survive in a savvy environment, where
tourists/travellers are literate individuals, branding strategies should fit their desires (Moutinho
et al., 2013). However, it is not an easy task to
assert strategies with divergent narratives produced on the same destination. Thus, a challenge
remains – how should destinations respond to
it? This subject has been covered at length by
Destination Marketing Association International
and others, but the academic literature remains
unclear. According to Reilly (1990), the focus
of tourism-image research has been understandably pragmatic and marketing based and
requests new thinking in tourism planning and
destination management.
Tourism planners and destination managers
now have the opportunity to connect with customers at many more communications and experience touchpoints than ever before to influence
visitor satisfaction, loyalty and word of mouth
(e.g. by social media). The digital world is truly
interconnected, interlocked and interpersonal. It
allows disparate items – ads, articles and social
experiments – to converge on one page as if they
were magic. A destination brand can be defined
as the sum of all narratives and experiences. But
who defines them? Are there any inequalities in
sharing content (e.g. by gender)? To what extent

Downloaded from jvm.sagepub.com at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on March 6, 2016

Oliveira and Panyik

3

gender influences the design of destination
branding strategies for example? There are
power relations that should be carefully analysed. Destinations are socially constructed and
the content produced by travellers is only a part
of that process. The better response is to use
real-life stories and engage with the content by
identifying and interpreting patterns across the
narratives in order to achieve consistency in
brand positioning.
According to Young (1999), tourist destinations are socially constructed and a negotiated
phenomenon. However, the question of how
places are socially produced and consumed lies
at the core of the geography of tourism (Young,
1999). The social construction of tourist destinations consists of two general subsystems. The
first is place production by the tourist industry.
In this context, place producers communicate
place meanings through promotional, interpretative and market research strategies. The second
subsystem is place consumption, which refers
to the tourists’ own construction of place. Tourists create place meanings using their actual
knowledge, travel history, motivations and preferences. Where the constructions overlap, there
exists the negotiated reality of the consensus
zone. Which places are selected to be branded for
tourism purposes, how and why they are given
particular meanings and how these meanings are
communicated to create convergence between
these two perspectives of place are key aspects
of the spatial dimension of social construction
(Young, 1999).
The notion of perceived authenticity is also of
particular interest because constructivists, tourists and travellers are indeed in search of authenticity (Wang, 1999). However, what they quest
for is not objective authenticity (i.e. authenticity
as originals) but a perceived authenticity which
is the result of social construction. Destinations
and the ‘tourist attractions’ are experienced as
authentic not because they are originals or reality, but because they are perceived as the signs
or symbols of authenticity (Culler, 1981) nowadays influenced by digital platforms. Perceived
authenticity is more often than not a projection
of certain stereotyped images held and circulated
within tourist promotion platforms, particularly
within the mass media and destination marketing
campaigns (Wang, 1999). Understanding exactly
how individuals perceive and use the information
spread by both online and traditional promotion
channels when planning their trips is a challenge
that requires suitable strategies (Alvarez and

Asugman, 2006). By not understanding it, there
is the risk of damaging the perceived integrity
and transparency of the destination’s brand and
reputation (Munro and Richards, 2011).
The accelerating and synergistic interaction
between information communication technologies (ICTs) and tourism destinations has transformed the nature of tourism products, processes,
business and the competitive environment
around them. Among the range of ICTs, the
Internet is the number one source of information
for travel and tourism (Munro and Richards,
2011). Websites are incredibly important for the
business of destinations (Buhalis et al., 2011).
Factors including a fresh wave of web-based
communities, known as web 2.0 and social
media (e.g. Facebook, Twitter, Instagram, YouTube and TripAdvisor), have changed market
conditions for DMOs (Buhalis et al., 2011; Page,
2009). Furthermore, social media has become a
highly effective way to reach out and engage
with the masses. In particular, social media
allows a DMO to develop an online voice, which
should be consistent with its destination brand
(North, 2013a). Therefore, a resilient and strategic approach to digital channels should be a corner stone of a strong destination branding
strategy. Recent literature on tourism planning
as Moutinho et al. (2013) and on place branding
as Pareja-Eastway et al. (2013) suggest that organizations in charge of designing branding strategies shall concentrate their effort on:
 Content:
 focusing on the interaction between
traveller/tourist and destination;
 engaging traveller/tourist with the destination branding process;
 Context:
 tailored approaches and contextsensitive strategies;
 integrate traveller-generated content;
 Co-creation:
 co-creating value through traveller/
tourist and the destination;
 destination branding through cocreation (i.e. traveller as active participant in the branding process).
Some studies reflect upon tourism communities (Wang et al., 2002), users’ reviews and recommendations (Yoo and Gretzel, 2008),
electronic tourism (Buhalis et al., 2011), perceived authenticity (Wang, 1999), and others on
social media strategies for tourism destinations

Downloaded from jvm.sagepub.com at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on March 6, 2016

4

Journal of Vacation Marketing
(Munar et al., 2013) and ICTs in tourism destination management (Buhalis and Matloka, 2013;
Leung et al., 2013). However, there remains a gap
in knowledge which investigates the relevance of
tourist-/traveller-generated content on the destination branding process.
By taking Portugal as a case study, this
exploratory research is aimed to show how content analysis can be used to identify and understand the way tourists’/travellers’ perceive
Portugal as a tourist destination. The application
of this methodology on online material could
better support a destination branding initiative
for Portugal by integrating tourist-/travellergenerated content (i.e. narrative, stories and
vacation experiences) and travel experts content
into the strategy, that is, co-creating tourist destination branding strategies.
To this end, a qualitative methodology has
been applied. The implication of qualitative
methods emerged from the principal approach
of this research to obtain in-depth understanding
of how travellers perceive, interpret and communicate the social reality of the destination visited.
An inductive approach was adopted to address
the research aims that are subjective in nature
and within an interpretative paradigm. According to Decrop (1999), interpretivism in tourismrelated studies is better approached by qualitative
methods. The qualitative approach used in this
exploratory research is in line with the methodology of various studies that focus on the meaning
and understanding of destination image (Echtner
and Ritchie, 2003; Govers et al., 2007; Pike,
2002 and Tasci and Kozak, 2006). In addition,
embracing previous studies on virtual destination
image (Govers et al., 2007), e-tourism (Buhalis
et al., 2011), communication strategies and city
marketing (Dı́az-Luque, 2009; Muñiz-Martı́nez
and Cervantes-Blanco, 2009), which mostly use
qualitative techniques, are fundamental to
enhancing arguments and justifying the present
research methodology. Specifically, a textual
content analysis was conducted on 20 international tourism-oriented online publications
from distinct, distinctive and neutral sources, all
referring to Portugal. The articles/texts were
examined and findings presented, aiming to
capture holistic components of Portugal as a
tourist destination. The selection of Portugal
as a case study is justified by the personal and
academic backgrounds of the author of this article and his academic positionality. It is of relevance to underline that the present study is part
of a 4-year doctoral research project exploring

the theoretical and practical paths towards a
place branding strategy for Portugal.
As the objective is to interpret the content of
publications where Portugal is reference, a content analysis will be a more valuable tool. Similar
studies on destination image apply the same
methodology (Volo, 2010; Wenger, 2007). The
content analysis approach is a form of scientific
inquiry that has commonly been regarded as a
useful method for social science studies, especially in consumer research (Kassarjian, 1977).
In addition, content analysis has been used in
several studies to analyse research articles in
hospitality and tourism management (see e.g.
Singh et al., 2007).
The results from the content analysis of both
the computer-aided and human judgmental
methods were then integrated and conceptually
graphed to map meaningful findings that were
logically precise, humanly readable and computationally tractable (e.g. ATLAS.ti 7.0). The reason for using this software is twofold. One,
because with today’s computerized neural network content analysis software such as CATPAC,
NVivo 2.0 or ATLAS.ti, the reliability of the
results is more guaranteed (see e.g. Govers
et al., 2007). Second, according to Lewis (1998),
ATLAS.ti emerged as the clear winner in the
overall product comparison with other qualitative
software such as NVivo 2.0.
ATLAS.ti is a self-organizing artificial
neural network software package used for content analysis of text. The software is able to
identify the most important words in a text and
determine the patterns of similarity based on the
way they are used in the text (Govers et al.,
2007). In simple terms, this software produces
a frequency table and proximity matrix for the
most often used words in the text, based on their
co-occurrences in one unit of analysis (Züll and
Landmann, 2004). Even though it requires the
researcher to use human judgment in making
decisions about the data, the decisions must be
guided by an explicit set of rules. The findings
must have theoretical relevance and be generalized (Kolbe and Burnett, 1991).
The application of this methodology on online
material could better support a destination branding strategy for Portugal by integrating tourist-/
traveller-generated content and travel experts
content into the strategy, as a back office task.
In particular, it helps us to better understand a
new, emerging phenomenon, the co-creation of
branding strategies. As such, the article will contribute to the interplay between theoretical

Downloaded from jvm.sagepub.com at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on March 6, 2016

Oliveira and Panyik

5

awareness and methodological sophistication in
the integration of digital channels, including
traveller-generated content platforms. Bearing
in mind the best practices in dealing with the
changing digital landscape (e.g. Tourism Australia, Visit Sweden and Penang State Tourism in
Malaysia), this study reflects on digital strategies
to respond to the digital opportunities and threats
in destination branding.
In the context of futuristic thinking in destination branding and futurecasting mega trends in
tourism, it has been argued that the everevolving channels of social media and the consumer shift represented by the new e-generation
are now inevitable factors in destination planning
(Moutinho et al., 2013). By 2013, social media
engagement has become the top Internet activity,
a higher time spend than any other major Internet
activity (GWI, 2014). Within this context, the
main contribution of this article arises from the
integration of social content analysis into destination branding strategy. The findings add to
destination branding practice and advocate that
DMOs or tourism agencies are requested to cocreate effective destination branding strategies
to deal with the growing number of digital platforms, tools and devices and satisfy tourists’/travellers’ expectations.

Literature review
Tourism, geographies and branding tourist
destinations
Tourism has often been seen as a key element in
the development of places, which are adopting
branding strategies – meant to gain a competitive position and assert their identity – in their
communication with potential tourists (Morgan
et al., 2011). Branding is considered a powerful
tool to develop tourism destinations (Morgan
et al., 2003). Cities such as Amsterdam
(Kavaratzis and Ashworth, 2006), Manchester
(Ward, 2000) and Bradford (Trueman et al.,
2004) have already reinforced their image among
visitors, investors, entrepreneurs, researchers and,
desirably, among residents. Countries such as
Thailand (Nuttavuthisit, 2007), Costa Rica,
Moldova (Florek and Conejo, 2007), Ireland
(O’Leary and Deegan, 2003) and Turkey
(Kemming and Sandikci, 2007) have undergone the processes of destination branding
and promoting a positive tourist-oriented
image. Regions such as Wales (Pritchard and
Morgan, 1998), Western Australia (Crockett

and Wood, 2000) and Florida (Brayshaw,
1995) have also been branded, primarily as tourist
and investment destinations.
According to Buhalis, a tourist destination is
a ‘geographical region which is understood by
its visitors as a unique entity, with political and
legislative framework for tourism marketing
and planning’ (2000: 98). Saarinen (2004) cited
in Morgan et al. (2011: 4) interprets a tourism
destination as ‘socioculturally produced space
in a constantly evolving discursive practice’.
Tourism images reflect people’s geographical
imagination and contribute to the making of
imaginative geographies, which refer to generally held ideas about particular places and
regions. This representation of tourism destination
is a fundamental part to define what a destination
is. Narratives, discourse, tourist/traveller opinions changes through time, context, gender and
cultural background. In order to be successfully
promoted in the targeted markets, a destination
must be favourably differentiated from its competitors, or positively positioned, in the minds
of the consumers and potential visitors. A
key component of this positioning process is
the creation, management and communication
of a distinctive and appealing image (Echtner
and Ritchie, 2003). In addition, tourism destinations are inherently complex. A range of social,
economic, legal and technological policies
affect their appeal, attractiveness, competitiveness and sustainability (Brent-Ritchie and
Crouch, 2011).
Destination branding is focused in lowering
costs, changing the type of visitors and changing
the nature or behaviour of visitors. Destination
branding also plays a core role in changing tourism products, integrating stakeholders and communities, avoiding irritations and responding to
issues posed to places. For instance, those issues
are created by the present economic crisis or the
fluctuating process of exploring, researching,
confirming and sharing travel experiences. However, branding places is not a magical solution.
Given the complex nature of destinations, it is
rather difficult and time consuming to persuade
visitors to change their perceptions about a destination. An extensive network that brings visitors
and destinations closer to each other composes
the technological environment. Ultimately, the
goal is to engage visitors with destinations. It is
also to create strategies for communicating assertively about the kinds of experiences potential
visitors may expect. Setting out a destination
branding strategy and integrating it with ICTs

Downloaded from jvm.sagepub.com at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on March 6, 2016

6

Journal of Vacation Marketing
Table 1. The methods used for booking by European
travellers in 2013 compared with 2003.
Methods

2003

2013

Internet
Travel agent
Telephone

13%
65%
22%

76%
18%
5%

emerges with the need for coordination of frontend and back office applications (Muñiz-Martı́nez and Cervantes-Blanco, 2009). Marketers,
strategic tourism planners and DMOs play a
major role in turning communities and cultures
into tourism destinations. There is also a case
in which tourism destinations flourish without
cultures, communities or identities (e.g. Las
Vegas). The branding process of a destination
requires a strong vision, focus and commitment
of time. In addition, it also requires qualified
human resources, engagement with stakeholders,
financial resources and changes in decisionmaking, culture and mindset (Balakrishnan,
2009). The Internet and the social media channels have generated numerous online user (traveller/tourist) reviews. According to Ye et al.
(2011), previous studies have revealed the influence of user-generated content on the sales of
products. However, the influence of online usergenerated reviews in the tourism industry is still
largely unknown to both tourism researchers and
practitioners (Sigala, 2011; Ye et al., 2011).
Therefore, there is a need for theoretical awareness and empirical research with regard to the role
of the web 2.0, the empowerment of the traveller/
tourist and the content they generate in shaping
destination brands (Buhalis et al., 2011; Munar,
2011).
Besides the acknowledged value of the
user-generated content in branding tourist destinations (Munar, 2011), the literature (ParejaEastway et al., 2013) suggests tailored branding
strategies, which focus on local realities, assets,
tangible and intangible elements. Contextsensitive approaches, as opposite to one strategy fits all, are required to achieve effective,
sustainable and long-term success in particular
in times in which the digital realm is contributing to a borderless world.

Digital evolutions, revolutions and
destination branding
With the growing importance of the Internet for
travel planning, understanding the online domain

of tourism is vital in order to identify the challenges and potential solutions for effectively
branding travel destinations. Travellers seek
inspiration online, anticipate more trips or holidays and want to stay connected while travelling.
The Internet is now as essential for inspiring new
travel as it is for planning them (Google Think,
2013). Moreover, the Internet has revolutionized
the travel planning process. According to the
Digital Portal of the European Travel Commission, nearly 183 million European Internet users
visited travel websites in March 2013 (Travel
Daily News, 2013) (Table 1).
According to the survey Attitudes of Europeans Towards Tourism (European Commission, 2013), the most frequently used sources of
information for trip planning are:
 recommendations from friends, colleagues or relatives – 56%;
 Internet websites – 46%;
 personal experience about a destination –
34%;
 travel agencies and tourism offices – 21%;
 tourism brochures and catalogues – 11%.
The lower values of the more traditional
mechanisms to plan holidays, such as travel
agencies and tourism offices (21%) and catalogues (11%), clearly highlight the increasing digital challenges in destination branding. Digital
revolutions are demanding conceptual, methodological and strategic evolutions on destination
branding (Morgan et al., 2011). According to
Balakrishnan (2009), managing a destination’s
international image and reputation requires strategies capable of leaving a clear and unique image
in the minds of tourists. The messages should be
consistent across all digital media channels.
Moreover, travellers are now socially connected during the entire travelling spectrum.
Moutinho et al. (2013: 317) refer to it as ‘New
Socioquake’. In response, Javier GonzálezSoria has underlined that the tourism industry
should use social media much more intensively
(see ITB World Travel Trends Report, 2013).
In addition, the travel industry has to respond
honestly and transparently to problems or criticism regarding their assets, values and tourism
potential – where tourists should be active participants, not passive audience (Moutinho et al.,
2013). Integrating the content they generate into
the process is actively engaging them with the
branding process of a destination (e.g. city,
region and country).

Downloaded from jvm.sagepub.com at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on March 6, 2016

Oliveira and Panyik

7

Tailored context-sensitive approaches to destination branding, integration between online
tourist-/traveller-generated content and branding
strategies, the core points of this article, bring
novelty to the literature on destination branding,
destination management and vacation marketing
(Moutinho et al., 2013; Pareja-Eastway et al.,
2013). Furthermore, virtual communities, blogs,
social networking sites and tourism review pages
give a platform for online opinion leaders from
anywhere across the globe express their opinions. As a consequence, they influence the public realm and co-create destination brands
(Moutinho et al., 2013). The traveller is now
empowered to create and tailor the brand themselves; it is the traveller who now won the brand
(Moutinho et al., 2013).

Digital trends, technologies and best
practices in destination branding
DMOs and public entities encounter tough international competition and so the adoption of information communication technologies in branding
processes has become a strategic imperative.
Every country, city and region offers a certain
package of tourism products, some integrated
into a destination brand, others only communicated through promotional material. Because of
this, the tourism activity has become saturated
with choice. Given these facts, there is pressure
for destination branding to focus on applying the
right set of digital tools rather than the technicalities of the tools themselves.
Internet, websites and social media have now
become mainstream in the tourism industry
(Digital Tourism Think Tank, 2013). Furthermore, the ITB World Travel Trends Report
(2013) states that social media platforms such
as Facebook, Twitter and YouTube, in recent
years, are increasingly being used for travel and
tourism purposes. Travellers are using ICTs to
exchange pictures and videos from past vacation experiences; to share ideas about possible
holiday trips and to seek opinions and reviews
of destinations, hotels, attractions and countless
other travel-related activities (Buhalis and
Matloka, 2013).
The ITB World Travel Trends (2013) reports
that:
 40% of travellers said social network comments influenced their travel planning;
 50% actually based their travel plans on
other people’s reviews and experiences.

The European Digital Landscape (2014) reports
that:
 The average European social media penetration is 40% (considerably higher than
the world average);
 Portugal, with 48% is one those 21 European countries with a higher than average social media penetration rate.
A considerable number of DMOs consider
social media either as the key ingredient to their
destination strategy or at least as one of their
main digital tools. In reality, if the tourism website of a destination does not display the territory
or destination brand, but instead uses the brand of
the promotional agency or DMO, it may reflect
the fact that the destination brand needs further
development (Roig et al., 2010). Among the
tools to measure the performance of country
brands, the Bloom Consulting Country Brand
Ranking (2013) provides insights into how countries use social media to interact with the public.
However, DMOs are aware of the values and
advantages of using social media (together with
websites and weblogs) to promote their assets,
distinctive competency and address challenges
that result in achieving strategic performance
objectives. One of the best examples in the world
that harnessed the power of Facebook and Instagram to engage with a global audience is Tourism Australia (North, 2013a).
Tourism Australia (Figure 1) has the most
popular destination page in the world (O’Neill,
2013). Their Facebook page has 5.7 million followers/likes (information collected on 30 May
2014). The use of social media by Tourism Australia DMO strengthens Australia’s nation brand
and promotes the country as a tourism destination. Portugal could learn from the Tourism
Australia digital dynamic in giving visibility
to their tourism potential, in particular the way
it engages with the traveller.
Visit Sweden (Figure 2) conducted another
concrete case of how a DMO can successfully
handle digital challenges in destination branding. Visit Sweden started a frenetic and innovative campaign on Twitter (followed by 69,200
users; information collected on 30 May 2014).
The aim of the campaign was to present Sweden
to the world as democratizing national speech,
strengthening the nation’s brand and hopefully,
as increasing tourism revenues (North, 2013b).
Visit Sweden handled its national Twitter
account by selecting a different Swede every

Downloaded from jvm.sagepub.com at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on March 6, 2016

8

Journal of Vacation Marketing

Figure 1. Tourism Australia Facebook page.
Source: https://www.facebook.com/SeeAustralia.

Figure 2. Visit Sweden Twitter account.
Source: https://twitter.com/sweden.

week to curate the Twitter feed by tweeting
their thoughts to the world. The Curators of
Sweden campaign sought to prove this and reinforce it by being ultra-progressive on Twitter
(North, 2013b). Portugal could learn from these
two examples, taken as best practices in integrating user-generated content and dealing with
digital challenges in the branding process. The

way both breakthrough digital channels could
inspire Visit Portugal to craft a destination
branding strategy to put together the voices of
visitors, the content generated by travel bloggers, normal tourist/travellers, shared through
social media (e.g. https://www.facebook.com/
Visitportugal and https://www.facebook.com/
InsidePortugalTravel), the objectives of tourism

Downloaded from jvm.sagepub.com at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on March 6, 2016

Oliveira and Panyik

9

stakeholders and the goals of the organization
(Oliveira, 2013a, 2003b).

Using hashtags in pursue of innovativeness
in destination branding
Nowadays, there is a kaleidoscope of mobile
applications and start-ups, which are making
waves in the travel industry and developing a
smarter way of travelling (Way and Scoble,
2013). Many major DMOs now have Twitter
accounts to communicate and promote their
destination. Some of them create hashtags to
promote specific events, campaigns or the destination brand itself (Oliveira, 2013c). The use of
hashtags on social media channels often
increases the influence of content (making it
public). Hashtags are those short links preceded
by the pound sign (#). They are used to mark
keywords or topics (e.g. #visitportugal and
#heritage). A destination should create their one
set of hashtags (Hiscott, 2013).
The hashtag was created organically by Twitter
users as a way to categorize messages. Now it is
also linked to content on Facebook, Googleþ and
Tumblr and is an extremely powerful tool on
Instagram and Pinterest (photo-sharing tools).
Hashtags are integral to the way we communicate
online, and it is important to know how to use
them (Hiscott, 2013). Clicking on a hashtagged
word in any tweet, message, photo or post shows
all other tweets, messages, photos or posts marked
with that keyword from all around the world. In
seconds, they become a piece of knowledge on the
global sphere. Figures 3 and 4 show the Penang
State Tourism Twitter account (followed by
7796 users; information collected on 30 May
2014) and Visit Penang Instagram feed (followed
by 4200 users; information collected on 30 May
2014). In both accounts, it is possible to follow
similar content by clicking on the hashtagged
word (e.g. #georgetown and #penang). This action
will open another page with all the pictures and
tweets marked as #penang. Penang State Tourism
is the tourism organization of the Malaysian
island state with the same name. We use Penang
State Tourism as an example, because our recent
research demonstrated that it is more active
among the DMOs using Instagram connected to
Twitter and it allows interaction with the traveller.
In addition, Malaysia ranks among the top 10
world tourist destinations in terms of international
tourist arrivals (United Nations World Tourism
Organisation, 2013).

DMOs already acknowledge that social media
tools are no longer in their embryonic stages and
therefore (potential) visitors need to be supplied
coherently with relevant material on these channels. This in turn requires digital strategies. The
way Penang State Tourism uses hashtagged
words, to communicate content, works as a best
practice for the Portuguese branding process and
destination branding. A hashtag used successfully across channels is a marketer’s and tourism
planner’s dream. If used well, an offline campaign can be tracked using the online platforms
that make digital branding strategies so compelling. Hashtags increase the relevance of electronic word of mouth and are a valuable tool to
share tastes (e.g. #delicious #portuguesecuisine),
attitudes (i.e. #inlove with #sunnyportugal) and
experiences (i.e. had great #holidays in #southportugal). Moutinho et al. (2013) argue that those
persons, who share tastes and attitudes, are the
only trustworthy source of information in the
‘new e-generation’ of the tourism sector (2013:
318).

The need for a digital strategy in destination
branding
The growing competition in the global marketplace puts, on one hand, intense pressure on
tourism destinations to guarantee long-term
economic success as well as sustainability
(Kastenholz et al., 2013). On the other hand,
the complexity of the destination branding
exercise requires digital strategies to face the
advancement of digital and online technologies.
The digital atmosphere provides extraordinary
levels of direct engagement of travellers with
one another (Kavaratzis, 2012). Travellers can
now create content that can influence future visits to a destination. Taking an Instagram picture
of one destination asset (e.g. Torre de Bele´m, in
Lisbon, Portugal, by focusing on the case of this
study or the Twin Towers in Kuala Lumpur) and
sharing it via social media has changed the way
the world accesses destination information.
Traveller-generated content affects the way
a destination is communicated to the outside
and inside territory alike. According to Florek
(2011: 83), ‘web 2.0 provides services that invite
users to engage in direct and strong participation’
and ‘with the advent of user-generated content,
every individual might potentially influence the
way in which [a territory] is perceived and evaluated’. Therefore, implementing digital strategic
thinking in destination branding is paramount.

Downloaded from jvm.sagepub.com at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on March 6, 2016

10

Journal of Vacation Marketing

Figure 3. Penang State Tourism Twitter account.
Source: https://twitter.com/VisitPenang.

Figure 4. Example of hashtags on Penang State Tourism Instagram feed.
Source: http://Instagram.com/visitpenang.

Digital channels provide forums for travellers
to discuss the places they have visited, write
about travel experiences and upload photos and
videos. The travel experience starts with a
dream. Potential visitors will use the Internet to
plan and book their vacation. Afterwards, they
will share their thoughts and feelings by using
online means. The new luxury in tourism is not
related to wealth but the use of time, simplicity
and richness of experience that create longlasting memories (Moutinho et al., 2013).
In practice, a digital strategy should integrate
traveller-generated content into the destination
branding process and thinking in advance the

right tools to engage with it (i.e. digital branding
strategic thinking). Destination branding experts
could work in an integrative way with social
media and electronic tourism experts in a coherent way, maintaining communities of interest,
collecting content, displaying photos and videos,
emphasizing local events, and encouraging electronic word of mouth (eWOM) recommendations.
Understanding that content, qualitative and
diverse information are the key to successful destination brand should be a key part of any destination branding strategy.
A destination brand is likely to be more effective if it is part of the destination’s overall

Downloaded from jvm.sagepub.com at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on March 6, 2016

Oliveira and Panyik

11

branding effort and that is much more than creating a logo, a tag line or opening a social media
page (Dı́az-Luque, 2009). The process should
consider the community’s needs, staying clearly
focused on objectives. In addition, engaging with
stakeholders and building the destination brand
with them in an active and participatory way will
positively benefit the process. Communication of
the brand image consistently and coherently with
the strategy is fundamental to maintain and/or
improve the brand reputation and give visibility
to the place/destination (Munro and Richards,
2011). The destination brand reputation should
be moulded by dialogue and branding strategies
crafted (see Mintzberg, 1987) to the social and
spatial context. If the DMO involves the visitors,
they will be more likely to keep the message in
mind, talk about with their friends and relatives
and spread it around the world using online channels. Travellers become co-creators of the brand
(Moutinho et al., 2013). However, we acknowledge the difficulties of managing collective
online opinion and discourse (i.e. generated content) and how to engage across the variety of
channels in an integrated way (i.e. tools in
strategy).
Organizations in charge of a destination brand
are recommended to eavesdrop on all the information/content created/generated by tourists/travellers. Researching with effective methodology
and understanding how the destination is perceived and communicated will provide compelling, timely and relevant paths to a successful
destination branding strategy.

Research methodology
Justifying the qualitative approach employed
Tourist destinations are not ontologically pregiven but, instead, socially constructed (Saarinen,
2004 cited in Morgan et al., 2011). And yet, the
investigation highlights that tourist destinations
do not constitute a structure of ontologically
prearranged places but rather are the outcome
of ongoing narratives among tourist/traveller
through which content is constantly reproduced
and nurtured during the staging of the branding
process. The epistemological assumptions in
these instances determine extreme positions on
the issue of whether knowledge/content is
something which can be acquired on the one
hand or is something which has to be personally
experienced on the other. How we come to
know tourist destinations? Is it about reading

and interpreting content generated by tourists/
travellers or by experiencing them? In addition,
how to integrate this knowledge into the destination branding strategy? Bearing these ontological and epistemological assumptions, this
study employs a qualitative framework within
an interpretative paradigm.
Qualitative methods are widely used in market research and are gaining large acceptance in
the social sciences (Decrop, 1999). However,
Riley (1996) notes that other majority of tourism
marketing research has relied on structured surveys and quantification. Qualitative research as
an alternative methodological approach has
gained acceptance in many fields, such as education, anthropology, and consumer behaviour
(Riley and Love, 2000). Qualitative research is
often qualified as bricolage or art, in contrast
with quantitative research, which is honoured
as being rigorous and scientific. If we accept the
principle that science is not a question of numbers but of reasoning, a qualitative study can be
as sound as a quantitative one in tourism studies
(Riley, 1996). However, studies that employ qualitative methods in tourism research and assessing destination image are rare (Govers et al.,
2007). Those studies lack a deeper understanding
of the holistic nature and subjective perspective
of the individual, not the destination’s unique
image features (Echtner and Ritchie, 2003;
Govers et al., 2007).
Being a timely and dynamic issue, the digital
challenge in destination branding requires pluralistic approaches. According to McDougall and
Fry (1974), the use of unstructured instruments,
followed by content analysis and coding, is more
appropriate in image research. Further in time,
Echtner and Ritchie (2003) suggest a combination of structured and unstructured methodologies to measure destination image through
travellers’ narratives. Recently, an increasing
number of researchers in tourism studies (see
Hannam and Knox, 2005), hospitality (see Singh
et al., 2007) and destination image online (see
Govers and Go, 2005; Govers et al., 2007; Hsu
and Song, 2013) are using specific research methods that are often conveniently grouped together
under the term discourse analysis, for instance,
text mining and content analysis when faced
with qualitative or textual forms of data, such
as written documents (e.g. strategic plans) or
visual materials (e.g. photographs; videos) (see
e.g. Hannam and Knox, 2005; Singh et al., 2007).
Following the application of qualitative methods (see e.g. Tasci and Kozak, 2006) and content

Downloaded from jvm.sagepub.com at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on March 6, 2016

12

Journal of Vacation Marketing
analysis in tourist destination studies (see e.g.
Govers and Go, 2005; Govers et al., 2007) and
bearing in mind the complexity of the digital
challenge, the novelty of this research lies in the
application of content analysis of written signs/
text (Dann, 1996) from tourism-oriented online
publications. The advantages of applying this
unconventional methodology is that by using the
right qualitative research software, and coding
(e.g. ATLAS.ti), the process of getting the information is easier, faster and dynamic. Moreover,
it allows researchers and tourism organizations/
DMOs (data seekers) to keep up to date their
studies and reports. Daily, the World Wide Web
publishes information relevant to keeping higher
levels of dynamism in destination branding exercises (generated content) and also to fit, sharply,
the experiences offered with the tourist expectations and needs and get the message across.
Tourists satisfy their personal needs by consuming enjoyable experiences (Urry, 1990).

Content analysis
Content analysis is an empirical technique,
which involves the counting, identification of
issues and interpretation of the content of a text,
which is assumed to be significant (Hannam and
Knox, 2005). Content analysis calls for the categorization of the various elements or components
to help researchers explain trends (Kassarjian,
1977; Krippendorff, 2003). Our argument is that
content analysis is suited to contribute to a better
understanding of the paths for effective and reliable branding strategies for Portugal as a tourist
destination. This is justified because several
authors were pioneers in the research topic of
travel blogs and other free tourism-oriented
online publications. Moreover, they have published research that actually analysed content
written by traveller bloggers (Pan et al., 2007;
Pudliner, 2007; Tussyadiah and Fesenmaier,
2008; Volo, 2009; Wenger, 2007; Woodside
et al., 2007). Their research is very valuable in
insights about traveller-generated content and
shows potential power in the co-creation of
brands (Volo, 2010). For instance, Pan et al.
(2007) analyse 40 travel blogs on South Carolina, USA, using a combination of semantic network analysis and content analysis. Recent
studies that intended to investigate online channels’ usage and social media involvement to promote Portugal as a tourism destination, content
analysis has been applied on online newspaper
(Oliveira, 2013a, 2013b). The present article

explains further the application of this methodology in travel blogs and travel review pages.

Content analysis with references to Portugal
as tourist destination
By taking Portugal as a case study, this exploratory research applies a textual content analysis
on 20 tourism-oriented online publications in
which Portugal has been referenced.
The selection followed the author’s own decision, after careful analysis of the links shared on
the official Facebook page of the Portuguese
National Tourist Office in New York, USA –
Inside Portugal Travel with support from Visit
Portugal (Figure 5). The content analysis was
conducted on 20 relevant articles published
between 1 September 2013, and 20 February
2014, in specific websites (Table 2). Out of 20,
14 texts constitute the sample that has been analysed within and interpretative stance.
The text of the 20 publications was content
analysed and research findings are presented
(Table 3). The software ATLAS.ti 7.0 was used.
ATLAS.ti is designed to offer qualitative-oriented
social researchers support for their activities
involving the interpretation of signs (written and
visual). One very early and important design decision was to leave creative, intellectual tasks with
the human interpreter. The tool WordCruncher
was applied to set out the frequency of words (that
supports our interpretation of the content, context
and co-creation and to identify potential hashtags
and suggesting tools; Table 3). Content generated
by travel bloggers and tourism reviewers was analysed and potential relevant elements to integrate
a destination brand for Portugal identified.

Research findings
Table 3 summarizes the findings of the textual
content analysis. Particular emphasis is given to
the tourist-/traveller-generated content (content
column). The context refers to the geographical
unit referred on the publication and the tourist
product emphasized. As underlined in the introductory part and literature review, the content
generated by the tourist/traveller could support
a design of effective and efficient destination
branding strategies (i.e. co-creation of the brand)
and boost existing tourist products of Portugal.
We also highlight the words that could be ‘hashtagged’ and communicated via digital channels,
such as Twitter, Facebook or other social networking sites and mobile apps, drones and digital

Downloaded from jvm.sagepub.com at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on March 6, 2016

Downloaded from jvm.sagepub.com at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on March 6, 2016

Figure 5. Official Facebook page of the Portuguese National Tourist Office in North America.
Source: https://www.facebook.com/InsidePortugalTravel.

14

Journal of Vacation Marketing
Table 2. List of online articles’ content analysed from September 2013 to February 2014.
1) Head for the Hills
http://monocle.com/magazine/issues/69/head-for-the-hills/ (December 13/January 14)a
2) The Cool Hunter – Culture and design website
http://www.thecoolhunter.net/article/detail/2219/grahams-1890-lodge—douro-portugal (11/11/2013)a
3) Personal travel blog – Julie Dawn Fox in Portugal
http://juliedawnfox.com/2013/11/21/rock-art-foz-coa/ (21/11/2013)a
4) Parents: Let the Azores save your New Year’s Eve
http://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/wonkblog/wp/2013/12/31/parents-let-the-azores-save-your-newyears-eve/ (31/12/2013)a
5) 10 Delicious Reasons Why You Should Visit Portugal!
http://catavino.net/10-delicious-reasons-why-you-should-visit-portugal/ (12/12/2013)a
6) Honeymoon Islands – Madeira – Portugal
http://www.azores-adventures.com/2013/12/honeymoon-islands-madeira-portugal.html (20/12/2013)a
7) Europe’s 10 Best Adventure Destinations
http://www.huffingtonpost.com/minube/europes-10-best-adventure_b_4315349.html (21/11/2013)a
8) The Ten Most Beautiful Places in Portugal
http://www.viator.com/Porto-and-Northern-Portugal/d219/top-attractions#feature (December/2013)a
9) For your consideration – Portugal
http://www.eturbonews.com/42543/your-considerationportugal (07/02/2014)a
10) The top European destination for 2014: Porto, Portugal
http://www.themalaymailonline.com/travel/article/the-top-european-destination-for-2014-porto-portugal#
sthash.Rsoz5xcH.dpuf (18/02/2014)a
11) New summer holiday temptations in Portugal, Turkey and Ibiza
http://metro.co.uk/2014/02/19/new-summer-holiday-temptations-in-portugal-turkey-and-ibiza-4309006/ (19/
02/2014)a
12) Porto Elected ‘Gastronomy Destination 2013’ By The Wine Magazine
http://greatwinecapitals.com/news/general-news/1556 (03/02/2014)
13) 25 Most Photographed Cities in Europe
http://www.touropia.com/most-photographed-cities-in-europe/ (02/02/2014)a
14) Portugal summer holidays guide: 2014
http://www.telegraph.co.uk/travel/destination/portugal/125200/Portugal-summer-holidays-guide-2014.html
(20/02/2014)a
15) Lisbon, Portugal – Baixa, Heart of the City
http://www.huffingtonpost.com/illeana-hoffman/lisbon-portugal-baxia-hea_b_4731044.html (06/02/2014)
16) 6 affordable European capitals to conquer
http://www.bankrate.com/lite/travel/affordable-european-capitals-2.aspx (Jan/2014)
17) Where to Eat in Lisbon
http://stylecartel.com/restaurant-hotspots-lisbon-portugal/ (20/01/2014)
18) Europe’s Best Hidden Beaches
http://www.huffingtonpost.com/jetsettercom/europes-best-hidden-beach_b_4612036.html (16/01/2014)
19) Rockin’ River Art In Portugal
http://www.globaltravelerusa.com/add-oporto/ (Feb/2014)
20) Travel tips: La Graciosa, 2014 hotspots and the Cotswolds
http://www.theguardian.com/travel/2014/jan/19/travel-tips-la-graciosa-canary-island-greece-portugalcotswolds (19/01/2014)
Source: Inside Portugal Travel: https://www.Facebook.com/InsidePortugalTravel. Date format (day/month/year) and it
corresponds to the day of publication.
a
Sample – see Table 3.

kiosk (i.e. tools). Subjectivity and personal creativity based on the literature and previous
research (e.g. Oliveira, 2013c) support the hashtag/tool suggestions (Table 3).

Discussion and practical
implications
This study content analysed 20 publications and
presented detailed digital strategies to deal with

14 that could inspire Visit Portugal. But is Visit
Portugal – the national tourism authority – integrating content generated by travel bloggers,
travel journalists and normal visitors into their
campaigns or strategies? The literature highlights
that it is wise to engage travellers and strategically
integrate the content they generate into the whole
destination branding effort (Wang et al., 2002).
In addition to the analysis of the content of the
mentioned 20 links, we follow Visit Portugal

Downloaded from jvm.sagepub.com at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on March 6, 2016

Downloaded from jvm.sagepub.com at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on March 6, 2016

Contentb

Shopping
Gastronomy Old-fashioned city

Wine tourism
Gastronomy
Port Wine
(Vinho do Porto)

UNESCO
Rock art World Heritage Site.
(-)
There isn’t a great deal of
information in English

A string of islands about 1000
miles west of Portugal

Portugal as home away from
home
Ten delicious reasons to take
vacations in Portugal

Igniting the flames of love
Madeira – Island of flowers

Madeira, along with the Azores,
is one of Portugal’s Atlantic
Adventure Destinations
archipelagoes and as classified
as one of the as Europe’s Best
Adventure Destinations

Na

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

#madeiraisadventure
#climinmadeira
#climbing
#adventure
#traveladventurous
Adventure Destinations
Adventure tourism
Wine tourism
Climbing activities

Madeira
Volcanic ridges
Stunning trails
Arieiro rocky peak

Laurissilva Forest

(continued)

Twitter
Facebook
YouTube
Drones for video-making
Mobile apps with trails and where
to climb

Weblogs dedicated to
honeymoons

Twitter
Facebook
Instagram
YouTube
#unforgettablesunsents
#romantic
#romanticmadeira
#romantichoneymoon
#madeiraportugal
#islandflowers
#madeirawine

Facebook
Wine Magazines
Food & Wine websites
#portugal
#yourhomeaway
#foodiedestination

Romantic destination
Madeira Wine
UNESCO World Heritage
Travel packs PortugalMadeira-Portugal

Wine
Food
Gastronomy as product

Portugal

Twitter
Weblogs in USA
Invite travel bloggers

YouTube (using drones for
video-making)
Mobile apps with UNESCO
heritage in Portugal

#azores
#newyearsevedestination
#visitazores
#portugueseislands

Portugal
Madeira Island
Botanic and Orchid Gardens

Targeting American travellers
Seasonal vacation packs

Improve informational material

Foz Côa
Northern Portugal

Azores (Açores Island)

UNESCO World
Heritage in Portugal

Douro and Côa Valleys
Porto

Twitter
Instagram
Digital language platforms

Twitter
Instagram
Wine review blogs

#portwine
#vinhodoporto
#portuguesegastronomy
#stylishcity

Port Wine as product
Porto City Breaks
Regional touring

Douro Valley
Porto
Northern Portugal
#ancientinportugal
#unescoinportugal
#portugueserockart
#rockart
#worldheritage
#culturaltourism

Twitter
Instagram
Foursquare

Tools

#shoppinginlisbon
#lisbonisfashion
#lisbontaste

Hashtags

Highlight
shopping and gastronomy

Co-creation

Lisbon
Chiado area

Context

Table 3. Research findings for 14 of the 20 online articles’ content analysed.

Downloaded from jvm.sagepub.com at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on March 6, 2016

If Portugal is on your list of places
to visit in the upcoming
months.
Palace hotel as luxurious and
romantic

The top European destination for
2014: Porto, Portugal
Porto city of street festivals,
fireworks and barbecued
sardines and meats

A high-end surfing lodge with onsite teaching has opened in
Peniche, one of Portugal’s
most renowned surfing spots

At the awards ‘The Best of the
Year’ by the WINE magazine,
the city of Porto was
distinguished as ‘Best
Gastronomy Destination
2013’

10

11

12

Palaces and cathedrals Golfers or
sun worshippers Tawdry
delights of the Algarve.
Beautiful towns and regions
it’s hard to pick ten most
beautiful places in Portugal

8

9

Contentb

Na

Table 3. (continued)

Gastronomy
Fish experts
Sardine
Ethnography
Folklore
Traditions

Surf
Waves

Wine tourism
Port Wine
Gastonomic destination
Enhance traditional food spots

Portugal
Porto

Portugal

Portugal
Porto

Multipack
Regional and city touring
Romantic destination
Romantic tourist packs

Nature and River Valleys
Landspace

Twitter
Facebook
Weblogs
Mobile apps
Integrated
booking platforms
#portwine
#winedestinations
#porto #portugal
#portugalgastronomy

(continued)

Twitter
Instagram
Facebook
YouTube
Weblogs dedicated to surf

Twitter
Instagram
Facebook
YouTube
Foursquare
Mobile apps
Free download of traditional
music
Digital kiosk
#porto
#besteuropeandestination
#portuguesefood
#fishisinportugal
#fish

#portugal #surf
#surfdestination
#bigwaves
#portugaladventurous

Twitter
Instagram
Facebook
Hotel booking platforms
Mobile apps with hotel palaces

#portugal
#romanticdestinations
#forlovevisitportugal
#portugal #palaceparadise

Weblogs open to comments

Twitter
Instagram
Facebook

#portugal #sun
#sunnydestinations
#golfinportugal
#visitsintra
#portugueseislands
#visitazores
#visitmadeira
#portugalisnature
#bragaaugusta

Multipack
Regional and city touring

Portugal
Lisbon
Sintra
Óbidos
Évora
Porto
Braga
Algarve
North
Douro Valley
Madeira
Azores
Bussaco Palace
Casa de Sezim
Palácio de Seteais
Palacio Belmonte
Solar Monfalim
History, built heritage

Tools

Hashtags

Co-creation

Context

Downloaded from jvm.sagepub.com at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on March 6, 2016

25 Most Photographed Cities in
Europe
Douro River in northern
Portugal, prized for both its
natural and architectural
beauty

There is much to discover in
Europe’s most westerly
country, for while golfers and
sunseekers flood to the
southerly Algarve, swathes of
the rest of Portugal remain
unexplored

13

14

Douro River
Douro Valley
Multipack
Regional and city touring
Nature
Landscape
Architecture
Music
(boost Fado as an asset)
Fado is the Portuguese
soul Music
Gastronomy
White Wine
Fish
Healthy food destination
Multipack
Regional and city touring

Porto
Lisbon

Lisbon
Narrow streets
Sintra
greener landscape, heartier food
and heavy granite architecture
Porto
Coimbra
Alentejo
white-washed, blue-rimmed houses
Algarve

Co-creation

Context

Authors’ own based on results achieved by using ATLAS.ti 7.0 and authors’ personal interpretation.
a
Following the order of Table 2.
b
Traveller/tourist-generated content.

Contentb

Na

Table 3. (continued)
Tools
Twitter
Facebook
Instagram

Twitter
Facebook
Instagram
YouTube
Mobile apps to support Fado
music sharing

Hashtags
#portwine
#winedestinations
#porto #portugal
#portugalgastronomy

#lisbon #yellowtrams
#sintra
#sintraarchitecture
#algarve #portugal #sun #beach
#whitealentejo
#alentejo
#alentejomedieval
#healthyfood in #portugal
#fishparadise

18

Journal of Vacation Marketing
official Facebook page (https://www.facebook.
com/Visitportugal) and Visit Portugal official
Twitter account https://twitter.com/visitportugal,
and we have noticed a permanent sharing of the
mentioned links and the application of hashtags
in key content. In addition, there is consistency
between sources and both, and the Facebook
page and Twitter account keep the same layout
and the content is shared simultaneously. There
is a considerable interaction after posting one
of the analysed weblogs (Table 2) and the ‘normal/average visitor’, which is the biggest challenge in destination branding in today’s digital
environment.
Discussing the findings (Tables 2 and 3),
which could inspire Visit Portugal and generally
other DMOs, the main cities of the country were
identified more frequently and their tourism
potential revealed (i.e. Porto, Lisbon, Coimbra
and Braga). However, cities as Braga (post number 8), Sintra (posts 8 and 14) and Madeira (posts
6, 7 and 8) and Azores Island (posts 4, 7 and 8)
also deserve special comments from bloggers
and reviewers. The portuguese gastronomy and
the variety of wines, such as Port Wine, White
Wine and Madeira Wine are often described for
its excellence and quality. The recent achievements of Porto as the best European destination
2013 (see post 10, table 2, page 14) was several
times reported and links shared (with large
engagement through Facebook likes and Twitter
retweets). At this point, it is also fundamental to
underline that those publications, shared through
a weblink, facilitate sharing platforms where the
reader can also spread the content through their
one social network (the e-word-of-mouth effect).
The posting and sharing processes value traveller/tourism content, despite the fact that Visit
Portugal can develop this exercise by applying
content analysis (in a larger scale than in this
article) and taking the content as the heart of
the destination branding process. The travellergenerated content supports targeting niche markets and the co-creation of the brand. Although
ICTs and the content shared throughout the Internet are not necessarily a source of sustainable
competitive advantage, its integration into tourism organizations is one of the key to success
as discussed in Gretzel et al. (2000) cited in
Buhalis and Matloka (2013).
The research findings have shown that the
content generated by those who interact with destination Portugal belong either to professional
bloggers or to ‘normal/average visitors’. Content
analysis can be used to identify and understand

the way tourists/travellers perceive Portugal as
a tourist destination. Tourists/travellers are opinion makers and storytellers with access to a
plethora of information communication technologies to act as co-creators of brands (e.g.
weblogs, blogs, virtual communities and social
networking sites). Tourists and travellers are the
new architects/creators of the destination brand.
Therefore, it is recommended that the tourism
sector takes a much more active role in engaging
with them, for instance analysing their perceived
emotions, desires or past experiences, and facilitating platforms upon which tailored, contextsensitive and co-created offering can be developed (Moutinho et al., 2013).
As the main contribution of this article goes to
Visit Portugal, they are recommended to look on
the Internet to find the backbone for a potential
destination brand to position Portugal as tourist
destination. Tables 2 and 3 show only a small
part of a large number of publications where
Portugal was mentioned. It means that travellers
who experience Portugal are generating content
about it. Visit Portugal and regional tourism entities can embrace their narratives, comments, opinions, suggestions, positive and negative aspects
in favour of a strong, effective and customized
brand. Although those narratives can contradict
the Portuguese National Strategic Plan for Tourism 2013–2015, the Internet offers dynamic tools
for tailored programmes and products.
Overall, the findings provide a preliminary
foundation for future research to investigate how
travel websites, travel blogs and tourist experts
refer to Portugal as a tourism destination. Content analysis attempts to reach a better understanding of which products are enhanced and to
compare with the national tourism strategy.

Conclusions and future research
Content generated by average/non-professional
travellers, professional traveller bloggers and
travel journalists who post, comment and share
information in social media channels is the biggest digital challenge posed to the branding process of destinations. This study concludes that
tourist/traveller-generated content could support
the design of a destination branding for places,
such as Portugal as tourist destination. With the
economic and financial breakdown, tourism
destinations, as Portugal, have less funding for
luxury in destination branding and further
sophisticated online marketing campaigns.
Tourism-oriented publications are all around and

Downloaded from jvm.sagepub.com at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on March 6, 2016

Oliveira and Panyik

19

for free. Therefore, tourism organizations can
build their online presence through social media
where they are invited to present themselves to
an audience without costs. Tourism Australia and
Visit Sweden are doing it well, as exemplified.
The ultimate goal is to meet travellers’ expectations (i.e. before, during and after the visit), travellers’ experiences, including experiences
from expert travellers (e.g. travel bloggers and
travel journalists) and the content/narratives
they have generated.
Efficient destination branding depends upon a
strong, visionary leadership, a brand-oriented
organizational culture, compatible partnerships,
departmental coordination and process alignment. Coherent communication with the destination stakeholders is vital. The digital domain has
emphasized the co-creational process of territorial brands in general and, at the same time, made
participation in this process more freely available
and more desirable. Moreover, ICTs give DMOs
the tools to facilitate a virtual dialogue between
residents and tourists before they arrive in and
after their departure from the destination. Preand after-trip interactions enrich tourists’ virtual
experience, enhance their destination image
through strong virtual presence and cultivate
their loyalty toward the destination. This is
where DMOs must play a more active role in
designing, facilitating and monitoring experiences across destination participants and touch
points.
This article, however, concludes that instead
of extending their brand communications to the
World Wide Web by simply digitizing the logos,
tag lines and other elements, tourism destinations, including Portugal, can build consistent
destination branding strategies digitally in an
Internet-mediated environment where virtual
experience takes place. Co-created destination
brands are the future successful stories. Tourists
and travellers can be animated to co-create the
brand content and support the destination branding process (the content of the final output will be
the result of the content generated by travellers
and interested public opinion). This in turn
increases the chances that consumers will share
the content with their own social networks – the
high-tech traveller will only respond to trustworthy, perceived as authentic brands, thereby
increasing the reach and visibility of the destination brand, which Visit Portugal has been doing it.
This research, the methodology employed,
opens up new perspectives on the digital
challenges in destination branding trends that

could warrant future conceptual inquiries and
empirical investigations. It sheds some light on
digital strategic thinking on destination branding
literature, with particular focus on Portugal. This
article is a pioneer in applying content analysis to
integrate content, engage travellers and co-create
destination brands for places. However, as future
research the number of webpages and weblogs
should be extended. In addition, future research
could also employ in-depth interviewing or focus
groups with destination marketers and managers
on how to integrate the results of social media
content analysis on their destination branding
exercises.
Funding
This research received no specific grant from any
funding agency in the public, commercial, or
not-for-profit sectors.
References
Alvarez MD (2012) Guest editorial: new perspectives
in destination management. Journal of Travel and
Tourism Research Special Issue Destination Management: 1–3.
Alvarez MD and Asugman G (2006) Explorers versus
planners: a study of Turkish tourists. Annals of
Tourism Research 33(2): 319–338.
Balakrishnan S (2009) Strategic branding of destinations: a framework. European Journal of Marketing 43(5/6): 611–629.
Bloom Consulting Country Brand Ranking (2013) Available at: http://blooconsulting.com/sites/default/files/
files/Bloom_Consulting_Country_Brand_Ranking_
Tourism_2013.pdf (accessed 1 December 2013).
Brayshaw D (1995) Negative publicity about tourism
destinations – a Florida case study. EIU Travel and
Tourism Analyst (5): 62–71.
Brent-Ritchie J and Crouch G (2011) The Competitive
Destination: A Sustainable Tourism Perspective.
Oxfordshire: CAB International.
Buhalis D (2000) Marketing the competitive destination
of the future. Tourism Management 21: 97–116.
Buhalis D and Matloka J (2013) Technology-enabled
tourism destination management and marketing.
IN: Costa C, Panyik E, and Buhalis D (eds) Trends
in European Tourism Planning and Organisation.
Bristol/Buffalo/Toronto: Channel View Publications, pp. 339–350.
Buhalis D, Leung D and Law R (2011) eTourism: critical information and communication technologies
for tourism destinations. In: Youcheng W and
Abraham P (eds) Destination Marketing and Management, Theories and Applications, Oxfordshire:
CAB International, pp. 205–224.

Downloaded from jvm.sagepub.com at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on March 6, 2016

20

Journal of Vacation Marketing
Crockett SR and Wood LJ (2000) Brand Western Australia: a totally integrated approach. Journal of
Vacation Marketing 5(3): 276–289.
Culler J (1981) Semiotics of Tourism. American Journal of Semiotics 1: 12–140.
Dann G (1996) The Language of Tourism: A SocioLinguistic Perspective. Wallingford: CAB
International.
Decrop A (1999) Triangulation in qualitative tourism
research. Tourism Management 20: 157–161.
Dı́az-Luque (2009) Official tourism web sites and city
marketing. In: Gascó Hernández M and TorresCoronas T (eds) Information Communication
Technologies and City Marketing: Digital Opportunities for Cities Around the World. New York:
Information Science Reference, pp. 152–183.
Digital Tourism Think Tank (2013) 2013 digital tourism brand index. Available at: http://thinkdigital.
travel/ (accessed 1 December 2013).
Echtner CM and Ritchie RB (2003) The meaning and
measurement of destination image. Journal of
Tourism Studies 14(1): 37–48.
Eriksson J (2013) The role of unique attractions in the
hyper competitive market of world tourism. Available at: http://blog.bearing-consulting.com/2013/
11/30/the-role-of-unique-attractions-in-the-hypercompetitive-market-of-world-tourism/ (accessed 1
December 2013).
European Commission (2013) Attitudes of Europeans
towards tourism, 334. Available at: http://ec.
europa.eu/public_opinion/flash/fl_370_en.pdf
(accessed 1 December 2013).
European Digital Landscape (2014) European digital
landscape 2014: we are social’s snapshot of key digital data & statistics. Available at: http://147.102.16.
219/demo1/attachments/124_european%20digital%
20landscape%202014.pdf (accessed 29 May 2014).
Florek M (2011) Online city branding. In: Dinnie K
(ed) City Branding: Theory and Cases. Basingstoke: Palgrave-Macmillan, pp. 82–90.
Florek M and Conejo F (2007) Export flagships in
branding small developing countries: the cases of
Costa Rica and Moldova. Place Branding and Public Diplomacy 3(1): 53–72.
Google Think (2013) The 2013 Traveler. Available at:
http://ssl.gstatic.com/think/docs/2013-traveler_
research-studies.pdf (accessed 1 December 2013).
Govers R and Go F (2005) Projected destination image
online: website content analysis of pictures and text.
Information Technology and Tourism 7: 73–89.
Govers R, Go F and Kumar K (2007) Virtual destination image a new measurement approach. Annals of
Tourism Research 34(4): 977–997.
Green C (2007) Sales and marketing in a web 2.0
world. Jacksomville: HSAMI Foundation.

GWI (Global Web Index) (2014) Digital 2013 – a global analysis of how consumers spend their media
time. Available at: http://www.smartinsights.com/
social-media-marketing/social-media-strategy/newglobal-social-media-research/ (accessed 29 May
2014).
Hannam K and Knox D (2005) Discourse analysis in
tourism research: a critique. Tourism Recreation
Research 30(2): 23–30.
Hiscott R (2013) The beginner’s guide to the Hashtag.
Available at: http://mashable.com/2013/10/08/
what-is-hashtag/ (accessed 1 December 2013).
Hsu C and Song H (2013) Destination image in travel
magazines: a textual and pictorial analysis of Hong
Kong and Macau. Journal of Vacation Marketing
19(3): 253–268.
ITB World Travel Trends Report (2013) Available at:
http://www.itb-berlin.de/media/itbk/itbk_media/
itbk_pdf/WTTR_Report_2013_web.pdf (accessed
3 December 2013).
Kassarjian H (1977) Content analysis in consumer
research. Journal of Consumer Research 4(1): 8–18.
Kastenholz E, Eusébio C and Carneiro MJ (2013)
Studying factors influencing repeat visitation of cultural tourists. Journal of Vacation Marketing 19(4):
343–358.
Kavaratzis M (2012) From ‘‘necessary evil’’ to necessity: stakeholders’ involvement in place branding.
Journal of Place Management and Development
1(1): 58–73.
Kavaratzis M and Ashworth GJ (2006) Partners in coffee shops, canals and commerce: marketing the city
of Amsterdam. Cities 24(1): 16–25.
Kemming JD and Sandikci O (2007) Turkey’s EU
accession as a question of nation brand image. Place
Branding and Public Diplomacy 3(1): 31–41.
Kolbe RH and Burnett MS (1991) Content-analysis
research: an examination of applications with directives for improving research reliability and objectivity. Journal of Consumer Research 18(2): 243–250.
Krippendorff K (2003) Content Analysis: An Introduction to its Methodology. Thousand Oaks: Sage
Publications.
Leung D, Law R, van Hoof H, et al. (2013) Social
media in tourism and hospitality: a literature
review. Journal of Travel & Tourism Marketing
30: 3–22.
Lewis RB (1998) ATLAS.ti and NUDIST: a comparative review of two leading qualitative data analysis
packages. Cultural Anthropology Methods 10:
41–47.
McDougall G and Fry J (1974) Combining two methods of image measurement: semantic differential
and open-end technique. Journal of Retailing
50(4): 53–61.

Downloaded from jvm.sagepub.com at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on March 6, 2016

Oliveira and Panyik

21

Mintzberg H (1987) Crafting strategy. Harvard Business Review 65: 66–75.
Morgan N, Pritchard A and Piggott R (2003) Destination branding and the role of the stakeholders: the
case of New Zealand. Journal of Vacation Marketing 9: 285–299.
Morgan N, Pritchard A and Pride R (eds) (2011) Destination branding: Managing Place Reputation.
Oxford: Butterworth-Heinemann.
Moutinho L, Rate S and Ballantyne R (2013) Futurecast: an exploration of key emerging megatrends
in the tourism arena. In: Costa C, Panyik E, and
Buhalis D (eds) Trends in European Tourism Planning and Organisation. Bristol/Buffalo/Toronto:
Channel View Publications, pp. 313–325.
Munar A (2011) Tourist-created content: rethinking
destination branding. International Journal of Culture, Tourism and Hospitality Research 5(3):
291–305.
Munar A, Gyimóthy S and Cai L (2013) Tourism
social media: a new research agenda. In: Ana
Marı́a M, Szilvia G, and Liping C (eds) Tourism
Social Media (Tourism Social Science Series, Volume 18). Bingley: Emerald Group Publishing Limited, pp. 1–15.
Muñiz-Martı́nez N and Cervantes-Blanco M (2009)
Identity and marketing of cities. In: Gascó-Hernández
M and Torres-Coronas T (eds) Information Communication Technologies and City Marketing: Digital
Opportunities for Cities Around the World. New
York: Information Science Reference, pp. 1–25.
Munro J and Richards B (2011) Destination brand
challenges: the digital challenge. In: Wang Y and
Pizam A (eds) Destination Marketing and Management, Theories and Applications. Oxfordshire:
CAB International, pp. 141–154.
North S (2013a) The power of social media for
nation branding. Available at: http://placesbrands.
com/the-power-of-social-media-for-nation-branding/
(accessed 1 December 2013).
North S (2013b) Swedish Rogues: daring nation branding on Twitter. Available at: http://placesbrands.
com/swedish-rogues-daring-nation-branding-onTwitter/ (accessed 1 December 2013).
Nuttavuthisit K (2007) Branding Thailand: correcting
the negative image of sex tourism. Place Branding
and Public Diplomacy 3(1): 21–30.
O’Leary S and Deegan J (2003) People, pace, place:
qualitative and quantitative images of Ireland as a
tourism destination in France. Journal of Vacation
Marketing 9(3): 213–226.
Oliveira E (2013a) The digital challenge in destination
branding: brief approach to the Portuguese case
(Extended version of the abstract). Conference
Proceedings of the International Tourism Week

Conference Series V – New Trends in Tourism
Management and Marketing, 15–16 April, Akdeniz University, Antalya, Turkey.
Oliveira E (2013b) Making strategies in destination
branding: what is the online tourism promotional
material saying about Portugal? Conference Proceedings of the International Conference on Sustainable Issues and Challenges in Tourism, 3–5
October, Boğaziçi University, Istanbul, Turkey.
Oliveira E (2013c) To shout or to hashtag? Digital challenges in destination branding. Available at: http://
placesbrands.com/to-shout-or-to-hashtag-digitalchallenges-in-destination-branding/#sthash.syp7
ARAZ.dpuf (accessed 1 December 2013).
O’Neill S (2013) In a Q&A, Tourism Australia reveals
the secrets of its Facebook dominance. Available
at: http://www.tnooz.com/article/in-a-qa-tourismaustralia-reveals-the-secrets-of-its-Facebook-dominance/ (accessed 4 December 2013).
Page S (2009) Tourism Management. An Introduction.
4th ed. Oxford: Elsevier Ltd.
Pan B, MacLaurin T and Crott JC (2007) Travel blogs
and the implication for destination marketing.
Journal of Travel Research 46(1): 35–45.
Pareja-Eastway M, Chapain C and Mugnano S
(2013) Success and failures in city branding policies. In: Musterd S and Kovács Z (eds) Place-making
and Policies for Competitive Cities. Chichester:
Wiley-Blackwell, pp. 150–171.
Pike S (2002) Destination image analysis – a review of
142 papers from 1973 to 2000. Tourism Management 23: 541–549.
Pritchard A and Morgan N (1998) Mood Marketing –
The new destination branding strategy: a case study
of ‘‘Wales,’’ the brand. Journal of Vacation Marketing 4(3): 215–229.
Pudliner BA (2007) Alternative literature and tourist
experience: travel and tourists weblogs. Journal
of Tourism and Cultural Change 5(1): 46–59.
Reilly M (1990) Free elicitation of descriptive adjectives
for tourism image assessment. Journal of Travel
Research 28: 21–26.
Riley R (1996) Revealing socially constructed knowledge through quasi-structured interviews and
grounded theory analysis. Journal of Travel and
Tourism Marketing 5(1/2): 21–40.
Riley RW and Love LL (2000) The state of qualitative tourism research. Annals of Tourism Research
27(1): 164–187.
Roig A, Pritchard A and Morgan N (2010) Place-making
or place branding? Case studies of Catalonia and
Wales. In: Ashworth G and Kavaratzis M (eds)
Towards Effective Place Brand Management –
Branding European Cities and Regions. Cheltenham:
Edward Elgar Publishing Limited, pp. 116–135.

Downloaded from jvm.sagepub.com at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on March 6, 2016

22

Journal of Vacation Marketing
Sigala M (2011) Special issue on Web 2.0 in travel and
tourism: Empowering and changing the role of travelers. Computers in Human Behavior 27(2):
607–608.
Singh N, Hu C and Roehl W (2007) Text mining a
decade of progress in hospitality human resource
management research: identifying emerging thematic
development. Hospitality Management 26: 131–147.
Tasci A and Kozak M. (2006) Destination brands vs.
destination images: do we know what we mean?
Journal of Vacation Marketing 12(4): 299–317.
Travel Daily News (2013) Available at: http://www.traveldailynews.com/ (accessed 1 December 2013).
Trueman M, Klemm M and Giroud A (2004) Can a
city communicate? Bradford as a corporate
brand. Corporate Communications: An International Journal 9(4): 317–330.
Tussyadiah IP and Fesenmaier DR (2008) Marketing
places through first-person stories: an analysis of
Pennsylvania roadtripper blog. Journal of Travel
& Tourism Marketing 25(3–4): 299–311.
United Nations World Tourism Organization
(UNWTO) (2013) Tourism highlights 2013 edition. Available at: http://dtxtq4w60xqpw.cloudfront.net/sites/all/files/pdf/unwto_highlights13_en_
lr_0.pdf (accessed 9 December 2013).
Urry J (1990) The Tourist Gaze: Leisure and Travel in
Contemporary Societies. London: Sage.
Volo S (2009) Conceptualizing experience: a tourist
based approach. Journal of Hospitality Marketing
and Management 18(2–3): 111–126.
Volo S (2010) Bloggers’ reported tourist experiences:
their utility as a tourism data source and their effect
on prospective tourists. Journal of Vacation Marketing 16(4): 297–311.
Wang N (1999) Rethinking authenticity in tourism
experience. Annals of Tourism Research 26(2):
349–370.

Wang Y, Yu Q and Fesenmaier DR (2002) Defining
virtual tourist community: implications for tourism
marketing. Tourism Management 23(4): 407–417.
Ward KG (2000) Front rentiers to rantiers: ‘‘Active
entrepreneurs,’’ ‘‘structural speculators’’ and the politics of marketing. Urban Studies 37(7): 1093–1107.
Way H and Scoble R (2013) 12 apps to help you
become a smarter traveller. Available at: http://thenextweb.com/apps/2013/10/28/12-apps-help-smart
er-traveler/ (accessed 1 December 2013).
Wenger A (2007) Analysis of travel bloggers’ characteristics and their communication about Austria as
a tourism destination. Journal of Vacation Marketing 14(2): 169–176.
Woodside GA, Cruickshank FB and Dehuang N (2007)
Stories visitors tell about Italian cities as destination
icons. Tourism Management 28(1): 162–174.
Ye Q, Law R, Guc B, et al. (2011) The influence of
user-generated content on traveler behavior: An
empirical investigation on the effects of e-wordof-mouth to hotel online bookings. Computers in
Human Behavior, 27(2): 634–639.
Yeoman I and McMahon-Beatie U (2011) Destination
brand challenges: the future challenge. In: Wang Y
and Pizam A (eds) Destination Marketing and
Management, Theories and Applications. Oxfordshire: CAB International, pp. 169–182.
Yoo H and Gretzel U (2008) What motivates consumers to write online travel reviews? Information
Technology and Tourism 10(4): 283–295.
Young M (1999) The Social Construction of Tourist
Places. Australian Geographer 30(3): 373–389.
Züll C and Landmann J (2004) Computer-assisted
Content Analysis without Dictionary? Sixth International Conference on Logic and Methodology
(RC33). Recent Developments and Applications
in Social Research Methodology. Amsterdam:
International Sociological Association.

Downloaded from jvm.sagepub.com at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on March 6, 2016

